You will practice creating and presenting data stories in an ethical, accessible, and professional way. You'll also explore advanced data visualization techniques in Tableau.
### Present a story
##### Welcome
Visualizing and presenting don't necessarily come at the end of your data exploration. You may create visuals of your own data throughout the data analysis process. The practice of visualizing your data will help you discover insights and further your own understanding. The presenting practice of the EDA is an important part of both the analyze an execute phases of the PACE framework. Sometimes you'll create visualizations to analyze the data during the analyze phase. At other times you will utilize data visualizations as part of executing an algorithm. 
Here, we will focus on designing data visualizations for the purpose of presenting. Concepts to be discussed are accessibility, Tableau basics, dashboards, and data visualizations. What to learn:
	Improving your data visualization basics.
	Accurate representation aspects and techniques.
	Techniques for making all your data visualizations accessible.
	Tableau data visualization platform.
What to learn in Tableau:
	How to create data visualizations in Tableau.
	Explain technical concepts to non-technical audiences.
	Create dynamic visualizations with interactive and motion elements.
	Alter visualizations based on different audiences' needs.
	How to choose the right graphic or chart, give context during presentations, and select the proper order and timing for your data visualization while presenting. 
##### Tableau Public overview
Tableau is a powerful data visualization tool used by data professionals around the world. Its available for free through its browser version, which allows learners to test out its capabilities of the software in a limited capacity. Here, we will get an overview of Tableau Public, the free use, basic version of this visualization software. 
###### Reviewing the fundamentals of Tableau Public
To learn: 
- the basic structures of the data source
The data source page is used for inputting or connecting to the data.
- design screens featured in Tableau Public. 
The design page is used for plotting and creating data visualizations. 
Both data source and design screens are needed to successfully design impactful and compelling data visualizations.
###### Data source page
Before you can start designing visualizations, you'll first need to upload your data. After setting a Tableau Public profile, all you need to do is log in and select Web Authoring under Create in the navigation bar.
The Tableau Public Web Authoring
Web authoring allows you to create visualizations directly from a web browser. This means you can create a visualization without downloading any software. 
Tableau Desktop Public Edition
You can also download this software directly to your pc or mac. Remember that Tableau Public should only be used for analyzing and sharing public data. All workbooks and datasets published will be freely accessible to anyone.
###### Data design page
This is where your data visualizations will be built. You can build data visualizations or entire interactive dashboards from this page.

Other ways of reviewing Tableau tools
Visiting the tableau website, taking specialization courses online on platforms like Coursera and Udemy, YouTube videos and blogs.

Key takeaways.
Tableau is a powerful data visualization tool, but that means it takes a lot of practice and experience to use it proficiently. The two main pages you'll use are the data source and data design pages. There are many resources to help you learn about it.
##### The visualization life cycle.
Often, creating a data visualization is an iterative process. The first graph you design may not be the only one you share with stakeholders. The colors, text, labels, scale, and areas of emphasis are all aspects of a graph that may change to meet different business needs. But how do we get to the final product? What decision should we make along the way to create a successful visualization? This is achieved through practice for example, by creating a data graphic. This will illustrate the types of decisions data professionals make when creating graphs and charts for presentation.
Accurate description of a data project objectives helps clarify the type of visualization you need. The plan is to: 
	Create a visualization that meets the business needs, 
	then make it easier to comprehend by adding a title, and color coding.
	at this point, we have a workable visualization that meets our criteria which is a successful first version. 
	However if you want to make the visualization part of a formal presentation, we need to make it accessible. We do this by including descriptive captions beneath the visualizations. We also make sure that the colors are friendly to individuals who might have difficulty seeing color.
The goal with visualizations is to meet an audiences needs. But what if the business needs changes? You will need to update the visualizations. The point here is that the resulting visualization may not always meet the business need. Designing visualizations is a multi-step process. Even after you've completed a visualization, you'll sometimes find you need to update it. You may also get new information that requires you to change the original criteria. Making changes and fixing mistakes is all part of the process.
##### Explore the possibilities of data.
Exploratory data analysis is everything. You can't do anything without understanding the data first. You need to first go in and understand what every single variable is, what the distribution look like, what the initial correlation look like. You can start to go deeper like that building explanatory models to start to look at the longer correlations and multi correlations between multiple variables together. Its everything in Data Science.
When delivering news about data, its important to shift from a data mindset to a client mindset. You need to marry the ideas that you learned during your data analysis to how it can actually be used by the client. A lot of ways that we do this is through visuals. We try to incorporate visuals that are very simple yet communicative. We use humor. Its a great way of engaging people and makes it very memorable for people. You use personal stories. They help people get your point across to others very quickly. Since you have a limited time to pass a message across to an audience, you need to be able to be able to get people's attention and make sure they remember the message. Know what the takeaways are and have very succinct next steps of what to do with the data that you have presented to them.
##### Top 5 data visualization resources for data professionals.
As you step into new roles in the data industry, it is important to keep up with data visualization trends by participating in visualization communities and accessing viz resources. Look for data viz communities to find training resources and other data professionals to help you maintain and improve your skills. These sites and communities can be a useful resource for maintaining a working knowledge of data visualization and accessibility.  Take time to explore each resource. In particular learn what they offer for training, education, and community engagement.
Where can I find a community of data professionals dedicated to building intelligent data visualizations for businesses? Here:
- Tableau
- PowerBI
Where can I find data visualizations paired with the datasets they are built from? Here:
- Information is beautiful - founded by David McCandless.
Where can I go to learn more about communicating my data visualizations effectively? Here:
- Storytelling with data
Where can I go to find out more about data visualizations created in Python? Here:
- Python Graph Gallery - a site created by Yan Holtz
Your data visualization journey doesn't end when you complete any program. There are amazing resources available that are consistently being updated with the latest trends and most up-to-date principles regarding the design, ethics, accessibility, and communication of data visualizations.
