You'll explore:
- how data professionals use confidence intervals to describe the uncertainty of their estimates.
- how to construct and interpret confidence intervals.
- how to avoid some common misinterpretations.
### Introduction to confidence interval
###### Welcome to module 4
In this part of the course, we'll explore how to construct and interpret a confidence interval.
A confidence interval is a range of values that describes the uncertainty surrounding an estimate. In stats and data science, there are different ways to describe the uncertainty of an estimate. Two main ways are confidence intervals and credible intervals. These concepts correspond to two different ways of thinking about statistics, frequentist and Bayesian. Confidence intervals are frequentist concept, credible intervals are Bayesian concept. Their goal is similar. They have different statistical definitions and technical procedures.
 Its important to know how to construct and interpret a confidence interval for two reasons:
 - Data professionals use confidence intervals as part of their job.
 - You may be asked about confidence intervals in a job interview.
 We'll discuss the importance of confidence intervals and data-driven work and how it can help you describe the uncertainty of an estimate. For example, confidence intervals describe the uncertainty of an estimate for:
- The average return on investment for a stock portfolio.
- The average maintenance costs for factory machinery.
- The percentage of customers who will register for a reward program.
- The percentage of website visitors who will click on an ad.
You'll also learn how to correctly interpret confidence intervals and how to avoid common mistakes. What we'll review:
- Identifying a sample statistic
- Choosing a confidence level
- Finding the margin of error
- Calculating the interval
- Construct confidence intervals for both means and proportions
- Use SciPy stats module to construct a confidence interval for a point estimate of a population mean.
###### Introduction to confidence intervals
Data professionals make point estimates about population parameters. A point estimate uses a single value to estimate a population parameter. For example:
- based on a sample of 100 penguins, a data professional might estimate that the mean weight of a population of 10,000 penguins is 31 pounds; or,
- based on a poll of 100 voters, a data professional might estimate that 55% of all 100,000 voters prefer a certain candidate in an upcoming election.
In contrast, an interval estimate uses a range of values to estimate a population parameters. A confidence interval is a type of an interval estimate. For example:
- for penguin weight, you might construct a 95% confidence interval between 28-32 pounds; or,
- for the election poll, you might construct a 99% confidence interval between 51-57%.
Here, we'll go over the main components of a confidence interval and discuss how confidence intervals help you express the uncertainty of an estimate.
Typically, data professionals use confidence intervals rather than point estimates to share the results. A point estimate can be useful, but a single value like 30 pounds does not express the uncertainty built into an estimate. This uncertainty is due to the method of random sampling. 
For example, let's imagine that the mean weight of all 10,000 penguins is 31 pounds, although you wouldn't know this unless you weighed every penguin. In practice, data professionals usually select one random sample because repeated sampling is often expensive and time-consuming. Since the sample is random, the mean of any given sample will likely not be equal to the actual population mean. Your sample estimate will not equal the population mean. If you only provide a sample statistic or point estimate, it won't be as accurate.
Confidence intervals give data professionals a way to express the uncertainty caused by randomness and provide a more reliable estimate. A confidence interval includes:
- Sample statistic,
- Margin of error
- Confidence level.
The margin of error represents the maximum expected difference between a population parameter and a sample estimate. In other words, this is the amount that a data professional expects their estimate might vary from their actual amount. The margin if error helps us to calculate the lower and upper limit of the confidence interval using the sample statistic. This range of values expresses the uncertainty in your estimate due to random sampling. Calculating the margin of error involves multiplying the standard error by a z score. Z score measures the distance of a data point from the population mean in a standard normal distribution. Typically, you'll use a computer for these calculations.
Along with a sample statistic and margin of error, a confidence interval also includes a confidence interval. 
The confidence level describes the likelihood that a particular sampling method will produce a confidence interval that includes the population parameter. For example, say you use a 95% confidence level to calculate a confidence interval between 28-32 pounds. Technically, this means that if you took 100 random samples from the penguin population and calculated a 95% confidence interval for each sample, then approximately 95 of the 100 intervals, or 95% of the total, would contain the actual population mean. One such interval will be the range of values between 28-32 pounds.
As a data professional, you can choose your own confidence interval based on the desired accuracy of your estimate. Common confidence levels are 90, 95, and 99% is a popular choice. For example, most election polls report a 95% confidence level, and most A/B tests recommend using a confidence level of 95%. Note that there's nothing magical about 95%. This is a choice based on tradition and statistical research and education. 
You can adjust the confidence interval to meet the requirements of your analysis. Information provided with a confidence level and an interval estimate communicates the uncertainty in the estimates. It gives your stakeholders more information and helps them make more informed decisions about issues related to the problem.
As a data professional, make sure your stakeholders understand your results. You should clearly communicate how to interpret a confidence interval.
###### Interpret Confidence Interval
Confidence Interval is used to express the uncertainty in the results. To better understand the results and effectively communicate them to stakeholders, its important to know how to properly interpret a confidence interval. This is misunderstood in statistics. Why? Its a complicated topic both for beginners and experienced statisticians. 
Confidence level expresses the uncertainty of the estimation process. What does this mean from a more technical process?
- 95% confidence means that if you take repeated random samples from a population and construct a distribution (confidence level or intervals) for each sample using the same method; you can expect that 95% of these intervals will capture the population mean. 5% of the total will not capture the total mean.
In practice, data professionals usually select one random sample and generate one confidence interval which may or may not contain the actual mean. Why? Because repeated random sampling is often difficult, expensive and time-consuming.
Confidence intervals give data professionals a way to quantify the uncertainty due to random sampling and also sampling variability. The confidence interval you calculate based on each sample will also vary from one sample to the next and any given interval will not necessarily contain the population mean. A 95% confidence level means that you can expect that 95% of the total will capture the population mean or proportion. In other words, this method will produce an interval that contains the population mean or proportion with a success rate of 95%.
Three common misinterpretations of confidence interval:
- 95% confidence interval means that 95% of the data values in your data falls within the interval. This isn't necessarily true.
- 95% confidence interval implies that 95% of all the possible sample means fall within the range of the interval. This isn't necessarily true.
- Assuming that a confidence interval refers to the only possible source of error in your results. While every confidence interval includes a margin of error, many other kinds of errors can enter into statistical analysis. e.g. poorly designed survey questions, or sampling bias.
When you are interpreting a confidence interval, remember that the uncertainty lies in an estimation process based on random sampling. 
- Confidence interval is a range of the sample mean that contains the population mean. 
- Confidence interval describes the likelihood that a particular sampling method will produce a confidence interval that includes the population parameter.
The 95% confidence level refers to the success rate of that process. In other words, you can expect 95% of the random intervals you generate to capture the population parameter.
###### Confidence Interval: Correct and incorrect interpretations
Correct interpretation
Imagine you want to estimate the mean weight of a population of 10k penguins. Instead of weighing every single penguin, you select a sample of 100 penguins. The mean weight is 30 pounds based on your sample data, you construct a 95% confidence interval between 28 pounds and 32 pounds.
- 95% C.L (28, 32)
Interpret the Confidence Interval
Confidence level expresses the uncertainty of the estimation process (confidence interval).
Technically, 95% confidence interval means that if you take repeated random samples from a population, and construct a confidence interval for each sample using the same method, you can expect that 95% of these intervals will capture the population mean.
The confidence level refers to the long-term success rate of the method, or the estimation process based on random sampling. For our example:
Population mean (weight of the 10k penguins) = 31 pounds.
For practical purposes, we use samples taken from the population. Imagine you take 20 random samples of 100 penguins each from the population, and calculate a 95% confidence level for each sample. You can expect that approximately 19 of the 20 intervals, or 95% of the total, will contain the actual population mean weight of 31 pounds.
### Construct confidence interval
###### Construct a confidence interval for a proportion
Data professionals use confidence intervals to describe the uncertainty of an estimate for population mean or proportion. Here, we will learn how to construct a confidence interval for a proportion using an example involving election polling.
Imagine you are a data professional working for a polling agency. There's an upcoming election for governor between two candidates, Tiffany Davis and Maya Cruz.
Your agency represents the Davis campaign. Election day is four weeks away. The Davis team asks you to conduct a poll to find out how their candidate is doing. You collect a random sample of 100 voters from the total population of 100,000 voters. You ask them which candidate they plan on voting for.
The results show that 55% of the voters prefer Davis, and 45% of voters prefer Cruz. The polls favor your candidate. If Davis gets over 50% of the vote on election day, it's a win, so 55% is a good result. Great news, right?
But you also know that this is only a one random sample of 100 voters out of a large population. If you took another random sample of 100 voters, you might get different results. If you took a third sample, the results might differ again and so on. In other words, your single sample may not provide the actual population proportion or percentage of all voters that will vote for Davis on election day. For example, on election day, Davis may get 52%, which is good enough to win, or a 49%, which is not.
Instead of relying on a point estimate as proof that your candidate will win the election, you can use your sample data to construct a confidence interval. This will give the campaign team a better idea of the uncertainty of your estimate, and of the possible election results.
Let's construct a confidence interval now. Let's review the steps for constructing a confidence interval:
- Identify a sample statistic.
- Choose a confidence level.
- Find the margin of error.
- Calculate the interval.
Identify your sample statistic
Your poll represents the percentage of voters who prefer your candidate, which is 55%. This is a sample proportion. Next,
Choose a confidence level for your poll. 
Most election polls report at 95% confidence level. The Davis campaign also requests that you use a 95% confidence level in your calculations. 
Your third step is to find the margin of error.
The margin of error refers to the range of values above and below your sample statistic. If you are working with a normal distribution and a large sample size, one way to calculate the margin of error is by multiplying the z-score by the standard error.
The z-score measures the distance of a data point from the population mean in a standard normal distribution. For example, a z-score of 1 is 1 standard deviation above the mean. A z-score of -1.5 is 1.5 standard deviations below the mean. 
Z-scores correspond to popular confidence levels. For 95% confidence level, the z-score is 1.96.
Now, you need to calculate your standard error. The standard error measures the variability of your sample statistic. It shows how much your sample proportion is likely to differ from the actual population proportion. The larger the standard error, the more variability in your sample.
Your sample proportion is 0.55 and your sample size is 100. If you enter the numbers to the formula, you get a standard error of about 0.05.
Let's put that all together. 
The margin of error is your z-score of 1.96 multiplied by your standard error of 0.05. This equals 0.098.
Finally, the last step in the process is to construct a confidence interval is to calculate the confidence interval :
- upper limit of your interval is : 0.55 + 0.098 = 0.648 %
- lower limit of your interval is : 0.55 - 0.098 = 0.452%
Therefore you have a 95% confidence interval that stretches from 45.2% to 64.8%.
While your confidence interval mostly lies above 50%, this isn't necessarily a reason to be optimistic about the upcoming election, since the lower limit of 45.2% falls below 50%. Based on the confidence interval, losing the election is still a possibility.
The campaign team may want to invest more in TV or social media advertising to ensure victory. 
Or if the campaign team want a more accurate estimate of the election results, they may request another poll with a larger sample size. This will be a more accurate estimate because it includes more voters.
Let's say you conduct another poll with a sample size of 1000 voters. The new poll reports that 54% of voters preferred candidate Davis.
If you calculate a 95% confidence interval using these numbers, your integral will stretch from 50.9% to 57.1%. This should give Davis team more confidence about the upcoming election.
Of course, there's still a chance their candidate may lose the election, since the confidence level is 95%, not 100%.
You may notice that as the sample size gets larger, the confidence interval gets narrower. With a sample of 100, the interval covers 19.6 percentage points. With a sample size of 1,000, the interval covers 6.2 percentage points. This is because, as your sample size increases, your margin of error decreases. If you could sample every member of the population, the margin of error would be zero.
But of course, it's often too expensive and time-consuming to sample an entire population or to take repeated samples. Data professionals typically work with a single random sample of a large population.
Confidence intervals help data professionals give more reliable estimates based on the available data, and based on your data, your candidate will likely win the election.
###### Construct a confidence interval for a mean
Here, you'll construct a confidence interval for a mean using an example involving the marketing of a new cell phones. 
Imagine you're a data professional working for a company that produces cell phones. Recently, the company developed a phone with an extended battery life. It's designed to operate for at least 20 hours without recharging. This is a big upgrade in battery life and will boost sales. 
The marketing team is planning an ad campaign about the new battery to help sell the phone. Management wants to make sure the claims about 20 hours of battery life is accurate before the ads go public. They ask you to analyze the data and make a reliable estimate for battery life of the new phone.
The company has produced 100,000 new phones. The Product Engineering team tests a random sample of 100 phones and records the data about battery life. Based on the data, you know that the sampled mean duration for battery life is 20.5 hours and the standard deviation is 1.7 hours. And based on the campaign's data about the standard manufacturing process of the batteries, you also know that the population standard deviation is 1.5 hours. The sample mean is over 20 hours for this test.
However, you know that this is only one random sample of 100 phones out of a large population. If you took another random sample of 100 phones, you might get different results. If you took a third random sample, the results might differ again and so on.
Your single sample may not provide the actual mean battery life for all the phones. The population mean for battery life could be 19 hours, 21 hours, or something else.
You can use your sample data to construct a confidence revolt that likely includes the population mean, for the phone's battery life. This will give the marketing team a better idea of the uncertainty in your estimate. It will also help them decide how to advertise the phone and whether they can claim that its battery lasts 20 hours or more. Let's review the steps for constructing a confidence interval:
- Identify a sample statistic
- Choose a confidence level
- Find the margin of error
- Calculate the interval
First, identify your sample statistic: Mean. 
Your sample represents the average duration of battery life for 100 cellphones. In this example, you are working with a sample mean.
Next, choose a confidence level: 95%.
Management requests that you choose in 95% confidence level. This is the company standard for new products.
Your third step is to find the margin of error.
It refers to the range of values above or below your sample statistic. You can calculate the margin of error by: z-score * standard error = margin of error.
You may recall that the z-score you use depends on your confidence level. For a 95% confidence level, the z-score is 1.96. 
Now, you can calculate the standard error, which measures the variability of your sample statistic. It shows how much your sample mean is likely to differ from the actual population mean. The larger the standard error, the more the variability.
When you enter the numbers into the formula, you get a standard error of 0.15. The margin of error is your z-score 1.96 multiplied by your standard error 0.15, this equals 0.294. 
Finally, calculate your confidence interval.
- upper limit: 20.5 hours + 0.294 = 20.794 or about 20 hours and 48 minutes.
- lower limit: 20.5 hours - 0.294 = 20.206 or about 20 hours and 12 minutes.
So you have a 95% confidence interval for the battery life of the phone that stretches from 20 hours and 12 minutes to 20 hours and 48 minutes. The confidence interval gives the company management important information. 
The lower limit of your interval, 20 hours and 12 minutes is above the company's goal of 20 hours. This helps the marketing team feel confident about advertising the battery life of the cell phone to be at least 20 hours.
You present your findings to the company's stakeholders and the results satisfy everyone except the head of marketing. The marketing director has put a lot of time and effort into developing the ad campaign and wants to be even more confident. The director requests that you analyze the data using a 99% confidence level. To make the director happy you recalculate the results.
Using the same sample data but using 99% confidence level instead of 95%. Your confidence interval now stretches from 20 hours and 7 minutes to 20 hours and 53 minutes. The lower limit of your interval is still above 20 hours.
This result should give company management even more confidence about the battery life and hopefully satisfy the marketing director. 
You may notice that as the confidence level gets higher, the confidence interval gets wider. With confidence level of 95%, the interval covers 36 minutes; with the confidence level of 99%, the interval covers 46 minutes. This is because a wider confidence interval is more likely to include the actual population parameter. Note that in this example, we know that the standard deviation is 1.5 hours. However, in practice, the population standard deviation is often unknown and has to be estimated based on the sample standard deviation. This is because it's difficult to get complete data on a large population. If you don't know the population standard deviation, this changes the calculation for the confidence interval.
As a data professional, you can use confidence intervals to help stakeholders make informed decisions based on accurate estimates. Your analysis of the data will help shape the company's strategy for the new product launch as a data professional. You play a key role in the future success of the new product.
###### Construct a confidence interval for a small sample size
Confidence intervals for large sample sizes are defined as sample sizes of 30 or more items. On the other hand, small sample sizes are usually defined as having fewer than 30 items. Typically, data professionals try to work with large sample sizes because they give more precise estimates. But, its not always possible to work with a large sample.
In practice, collecting data is often expensive and time consuming. If you don't have the time, money, or resources to take a large sample, you may end up working with a small sample. Here, we are going to look at how to construct a confidence interval for a small sample size step by step using an example involving mean emission levels for a new car engine.
###### Large versus small sample sizes
First, let's briefly discuss the different methods you use to construct confidence intervals for large and small sample sizes. 
Large sample: Z-scores
For large sample sizes, you use z-scores to calculate the margin of error. This is because of the central limit theorem: for large sample sizes, the sample mean is approximately normally distributed. For a standard normal distribution, also called a z-distribution, you use z-scores to make calculations about your data. 
Small sample: T-scores
For small sample sizes, you need to use a different distribution, called t-distribution. Statistically speaking, this is because there is more uncertainty involved in estimating the standard error for small sample sizes. If you are working with a small sample size, and your data is approximately distributed, you should use a t-distribution rather than the standard normal distribution. For a t-distribution, you use t-scores to make calculations about your data.
The graph of the t-distribution has a bell shape that is similar to the standard normal distribution. But, the t-distribution has bigger tails than the standard normal distribution does. The bigger tails indicate the higher frequency of outliers that come with a small dataset. As the sample size increases, the t-distribution approaches the normal distribution. When the sample size reaches 30, the distributions are practically the same, and you can use the normal distribution for your calculations.
Example: Mean emission levels.
Let's construct a confidence interval for a small sample.
Context
Imagine you're a data professional working for an auto manufacturer. The company produces high performance cars that are sold around the world. Typically, the engines in these cars have high emission rates of carbon dioxide, or CO2, which is a greenhouse gas that contributes to global warming. The engineering team has designed a new engine to reduce emissions for the company's best-selling car.
Goal
The goal is to keep emissions below 460 grams of CO2 per mile. This will ensure the car meets emissions standards in every country it's sold in. Plus, the lower emissions rate is good for the environments, which will appeal to new customers.
Ask
The engineering team asks you to provide a reliable estimate of the emissions rate for the new engine. Due to production issues, there are only a limited number of engines available for testing. So, you'll be working with a small sample size.
Sample
The engineering team tests a random sample of 15 engines and collects data on their emissions. The mean emissions rate is 430 grams of CO2 per mile, and the standard deviation is 35 grams of CO2 per mile.
Your single sample may not provide the actual mean emissions rate for every engine. The population mean for emissions could be above or below 430 grams of CO2 per mile. Even though you only have a small sample of engines, you can construct a confidence interval that likely includes the actual emissions rate for a large populations of engines. This will give your manager a better idea of the uncertainty in your estimate. It will also help the engineering team decide if they need to do more work on the engine to lower the emissions rate.
Construct the confidence interval
Let's review the steps for constructing a confidence interval:
- Identify a sample statistic
- Choose a confidence level
- Find the margin of error
- Calculate the interval
Step 1: Identify a sample statistic
First, identify your sample statistic. Your sample represents the average emissions rate for 15 engines. You are working with a sample mean.
Step 2: Choose a confidence level
Next, choose a confidence level. The engineering team requests that you choose a 95% confidence level.
Step 3: Find the margin of error
Your third step is to find the margin of error. For a small sample size, you calculate the margin of error by multiplying the t-score by the standard error.
The t-distribution is defined by a parameter called degree of freedom. In our context, the degree of freedom is the sample size minus 1.
	degree of freedom: 15 - 1 = 14.
Given your degree of freedom and your confidence level, you can use a programming language like Python or other statistical software to calculate your t-score. 
Based on your degree of freedom of 14, and a confidence level of 95%, your t-score is 2.145.
Now you can calculate the standard error, which measures the variability of your sample statistic. There is a formula for the standard error of the mean: 
- SE(x) = s/ square root(n). 
In the formula, s stands for standard deviation, and n refers to sample size.
Your sample standard deviation is 35, and your sample size is 15. The calculation gives you a standard error of about 9.04.
The margin of error is your t-score multiplied by the standard error. This is 2.145 * 9.04 = 19.39.
Step 4: Calculate the interval
Finally, calculate your confidence interval. The upper limit of your interval is the sample mean plus the margin of error. This is 430 + 19.39 = 449.39 grams of CO2 per mile.
The lower limit is the sample mean minus the margin of error. This is 430 - 19.39 = 410.61 grams of CO2 per mile.
95 CI (410.61, 449.39)
The confidence interval gives the engineering team important information. The upper limit of your interval is below the target of 460 grams of CO2 per mile. This result provides solid statistical evidence that the emission rate for the new engine will meet emissions standards.
Note: Confidence intervals for small sizes only deal with population means, and not population proportions. The statistical reason for this distinction is rather technical, so you don't need to worry about it for now.
Key takeaways
As a data professional, you'll work with both large and small sample sizes. Although large samples give precise estimates than small samples, collecting a small sample is usually less expensive and time consuming than collecting a large sample. Knowing how to construct confidence intervals for different sample sizes will help you manage any dataset that you may encounter in your future career.
