### Introduction.
Here, you will develop an understanding of Python syntax, logic, data types, objects, and object-oriented programming. For many data professionals, Python is key to unlocking advanced analytics, machine learning, and the world of data science. By the end of this course, you'll will better understand how data science use programming on the job and how Python will be an important tool throughout your career as a data analytics professional.
You'll learn about Jupyter Notebooks, an interactive environment for coding and data work. You'll investigate how to use variables and data types to store and organize your data; and, you'll begin practicing some important coding skills.

##### What you'll learn.
- Collaborate on data project.
- Jupyter Notebooks.
- Object-oriented programming.
- Variables.
- Naming conventions.
- Data types.

### The Power of Python.
##### Computer programming.
The process of giving instructions to a computer to perform an action or set of actions. You can use different programming languages to write these instructions. You might use a specific programming language based on what project you're working on or the problem you want to solve.
The Python programming language is useful when working with data. Data professionals use Python to analyze data in faster, more efficient, more powerful ways because it optimizes every phase of the data workflow. From exploring, cleaning and visualizing data to building machine learning models. 
Course overview: 
- Variables & Data types- helps store and organize your data.
- Functions - reusable chunks of code that lets you perform a specific tasks. They help you work with data quickly and efficiently.
- Conditional statements - tell a computer how to make decisions based on your instructions.
- Loops - repeats a portion of code until a process is complete.
- Strings - sequences of characters such as letters and punctuation marks.
- Data structures - methods of storing and organizing data in a computer. Useful structures for data professionals includes lists, dictionaries, sets, and dataframes.
- Apply the skills in an end of course project that you can add to your professional portfolio.

##### Programming Languages.
The words and symbols we use to write instructions for computers to follow. we rely on computer hardware to write code that will communicate what the computer to do. The most fundamental part of a computer is a transistor. It controls the flow of electricity through a circuit. it can exist in two states; ON or OFF. When a transistor is ON, electricity passes through it, and when its OFF, it blocks the flow of electricity. This duality defines how computers operate. If you chain enough transistors together, each either On or OFF, you can create complex logic. How does this relate to computer programming? Well, because computers are just billions of transistors or switches, they understand things only in binary terms. Binary is represented as 1 and 0 and are just easier way to understand the ON or OFF sequences of transistors when a computer receives instructions from a program. Computers though powerful, can only understand instructions given in binary format. Human beings are not great at understanding binary and this is what gave rise to programming languages. 
- The very first programming languages were difficult to use, required lots of training, and often only worked on the specific machines that each was designed for. They are known as Low-level languages.
- Over time new programming languages were developed to simplify and generalize programming instructions. The programming languages became easier to learn because they were designed with simpler rules and structures known as syntax. Modern coding languages use syntax that's much more familiar to humans and are known as High-level languages. 
Python is a high-level language. It is versatile, powerful making it a favorite to data scientist and web developers too. Its also open source. Developers have created many libraries and tools to make any job requiring Python easier. 
Library - a reusable collection of code. 
Coding is simple and complex that is, each line of code represents a small simple idea but together those lines of code can express very complex logic. Coding can be frustrating at times but it is fun and rewarding too. Keep practicing. 

##### Discover more about Python.
The print statement. It will output whatever we print in its parentheses.

```python
print('hello world') # here it will print a string 'hello world' as the output.
```

Python can also perform computation.

```python
print(5 + 4) # this will return an addition of values 5 and 4 which is 9.
```

Assigning variables in Python. Here a variable acts as a container that stores the value assigned to it.

```python
x = 5 # here we have assigned the number 5 to a variable x.

y = 'Python' # here we have assigned the string 'Python' to a variable y.

```

Python can also be used to evaluate statements. The computer returns True or False.

```python
5 == 5 # here Python will evaluate this code.

10**3 == 1000 # here the computer will return True.

```

Python use operators to perform calculations. There are rules and instructions to this. You'll learn them by practicing using Python during programming. 

Performing actions based on conditional logic.

```python
if age >= 18:
	print('adult')
else:
	print('minor')

```

Looping in Python. It performs a each action to the same element of something.

```python
for number in [1,2,3,4,5]
	print(number)
```

The computer outputs 1 through 5. 
Function -  a chunk of code that can be reused to perform the same task.

```python
def is_adult(age):
	if age >= 18:
		print('adult')
	else:
		print('minor')
```

When you call the above function and pass in the age as an argument, the function will return either adult or minor as specified in the function. An argument is information you give a function in its parentheses.
Python has a library of its own built in libraries that perform common tasks.

```python
import math # this is how you import a Python library.
sorted() # is a built-in python library that sorts numbers.
```

### Python vs Other programming languages.
Python programming language is a great add on to your data analytics toolbox. Its use of syntax to communicate commands and perform tasks mirrors spoken language. This makes it much easier programming language to learn. Its structure is similar to many other programming languages, but there are some key differences to consider as well. In this reading, you'll learn how Python compares to other programming languages data professionals use, including R, Java, and C++.
##### 5 considerations of programming languages.
Python isn't the only programming language used for data analysis however its the most widely used and most powerful. Many data professionals even use more than one programming language and each language has its benefits and drawbacks. For the purpose of data analytics, here is what you consider.
- Speed
In general, low-level programming languages are faster, but they are more difficult to learn and work with. There are many other factors that contribute to the speed of a program's execution, including compile time, runtime, hardware, installed dependencies, and the efficiency of the code itself.
- Approachability
This refers to how easy it is for new learners to start using a language. This depends on the syntax and overall structure of the programming language. Syntax is the structure of code words, symbols, placement, and punctuation. Semantics builds meaning into those structures by using variables and objects. Then, those variables help add flexibility to those programs and objects where data is housed. 
- Variables
A variable is a named container which stores values in a reserved location in the computer's memory. Information in code is stored in variables. The way a programming language uses variables will have an effect on a system's core operations or kernel speed. Some languages uses static variables to maintain a value throughout the entire run of the program. Others approach variables as dynamic, allowing values to be determined when a program is run. Some languages even allow declarative variables, which enable a program to determine where a variable should be placed.
- Data science focus
Programming languages have individual characteristics and can better serve different tasks in data analysis; this means programmers often use them for specific data science tasks.
- Programming paradigm
Programming languages can be object-oriented, functional, or imperative. Object-oriented programming languages are modelled around data objects. Functional programming languages are modeled around functions. Imperative languages are modeled around code statements that can alter the state of the program itself.

##### Programming language comparisons.
Python :
	- Speed - slower.
	- Approachability - Easy to learn.
	- Variable - dynamic.
	- Data science focus - Machine learning and automated analysis.
	- Programming paradigm - Object-oriented.
R :
	- Speed - Depends on configuration and add-ons.
	- Approachability - Complex.
	- Variable - Dynamic.
	- Data science focus - EDA and building extensive statistical libraries.
	- Programming paradigm - Functional language.
Java :
	- Speed - Faster.
	- Approachability - Easy to learn.
	- Variable - Static.
	- Data science focus - Used across projects with open source assets.
	- Programming paradigm - Object-oriented.
C++ :
	- Speed - Very fast.
	- Approachability - Complex.
	- Variable - Declarative.
	- Data science focus - not as widely used but very powerful implementations.
	- Programming paradigm - Multiple-paradigm (Imperative & object-oriented.

Key takeaways.
There are a number of programming languages that can be used for data analysis. Each language has its own benefits and drawbacks. Learning to work with different languages will give you the opportunity to broaden your data skills and access new tools for your analysis. 

### How to use Jupyter Notebooks.
Jupyter Notebook is an open-source web application for creating and sharing documents containing live code, mathematical formulas, visualization, and text. Its a great tool to develop and present code in a standardized text block format that is interactive and shareable. One can create code, mathematical formulas, data visualizations, and even freestyle text-- all in Jupyter notebooks!
In this program, we'll be using Jupyter notebooks to write, execute, and present your own code. The application can be accessed through the browser or by downloading the desktop application onto your device to work with over 100 programming languages, including R and Python.

##### Why use Jupyter Notebooks?
Notebooks are particularly useful for working with data. Here are some ways that Jupyter notebooks excel:
- Modular/interactive computing - You can write and execute individual chunks of code in small, manageable chunks, which are called cells. You can run a cell without particularly having to run the whole notebook. This is especially helpful in data exploration and experimentation. Cells are also helpful in debugging, because they provide a user-friendly way to make a mistake, notice that you made it, and iterate back to correct your mistake, without having to re-execute the whole script.
- Support for multiple languages - making it powerful and versatile.
- Data exploration and analysis - it offers tools to load, clean, analyze, and examine it in an elegant interface.
- Cloud-based services - making it easy to run and share without setting up a local environment. This is very useful in collaboration.
- Libraries and extensions - there is a rich ecosystem of extensions and plugins that enhance functionality for whatever type of project you're working on.

##### How to use Jupyter notebooks.
Once you have opened a Jupyter notebook, Here are a few tips on how to use it. 
- Command/edit mode - Notebooks have two modes (command and edit mode). 
	- Command mode is used to interact with the notebook as a whole and perform actions like adding, moving, and deleting cells. It's indicated by a blue bar on the left side of the current cell. 
	- Edit mode is used to type code or markdown text into a particular cell. Its indicated by a green bar on the left and also a thin green border around the active cell. To enter this mode, simply click into a cell to insert your cursor there or use the navigation arrows on your keyboard to select a cell and press Enter. To revert back into command mode, click anywhere outside the cell or press the escape key
- Markdown mode - Jupyter notebooks allow you to toggle cells between coding mode and Markdown mode. 
	- Markdown is a markup language that lets you add formatting elements to plain text. Its useful because its ubiquitous, futureproof, and platform independent. Markdown text is used to provide written explanations, analysis, and context to explain the code and its output. To toggle between code and markdown mode, go to the menu at the top of the page and click where it says 'Code'. Then select 'Markdown' from the dropdown menu that appears.

##### Common actions.
Most actions can be performed using both a mouse/graphic interface and keyboard shortcuts. Here are some of the most common actions. Use command mode to select a cell or group of cells.
- Add a new cell - command + a to add a cell above the current cell, command + b to add a cell below the current cell.
- Delete a cell - command + (press d twice) to delete a cell.
- Move a cell - click on the up/down arrow button at the top of the notebook to move the selected cells up or down.
- Run a cell - Cltr + Enter - Run selected cells, Shift + Enter - Run selected cell and next cell, Alt + Enter - Run selected cell and insert new cell below.
 - You can run cells both in command mode and edit mode. 

##### Troubleshooting.
At times, you might encounter difficulty accessing or running the notebook. Here are some troubleshooting steps to help you if this happens.

###### Browser compatibility.
Make sure your internet browser is updated regularly. Its recommended to use the latest versions of the browser. Try using Google Chrome, Firefox, or Microsoft Edge browsers. If you're using an outdated browser, you might have issues, and if so, use the ones recommended above. 
If your browser is up to date and you are using one of the browsers listed above and still encountering problems, try restarting your browser or clearing your browser's cache and cookies. You might also use incognito mode, which prevents your browser from storing cookies and other temporary data.

##### Internet connection.
Coursera requires a stable internet connection. You may experience problems using a slow or unreliable internet connection. Some signs of an unstable internet connection may be pages failing to load, freezing labs, or the inability to type or enter commands within the lab environment.

### Object-oriented programming.
Definition: Its the programming system/paradigm that is based around objects, which can contain both data and code that manipulates that data.

##### Object.
An instance of a class; a fundamental building block of Python. Examples are lists, strings, functions, etc. The main idea behind object oriented programming is to have data and the methods that manipulate it within objects allowing for more organized, accessible, and reusable code.

##### Class.
Is an object's data type that bundles data and functionality together. Its the most important concept in OOP. The reason why its useful for an object to have a type or belong to a class, is because it allows us to build a bunch of useful tools that can be packed directly into the object itself. 
For Example:
```python
magic = 'hocus pocus' # this is a variable which has a str data type
```

In the example above, the variable 'magic' belongs to a  string class and because it belongs to the string class, it behaves in a certain way, has a lot of built in functionality reserved for strings. We can use all the string methods and functions on the variable since it belongs to the string class. 
For Example:
```python
magic = magic.swapcase() # this changes the casing of the variable from lowercase to uppercase and vice versa.
```

Python classes are powerful and convenient because they come with built-in features that simplify common data analysis tasks. These features are known as attributes and methods.

-  Attribute.
	A value associated with an object or class which is referenced by name using dot notation. We don't use parentheses. Are important for custom built classes and more complex data structures like Dataframes. They allow you to access the characteristics of a class without changing or modifying it. An attribute is a characteristic of the object.
	
- Method.
	A function that belongs to a class and typically performs an action or operation. Methods use parentheses. Just like the example above changed the casing of the variable 'magic'. Methods are actions or operations. 
	
##### Dot Notation.
How to access the methods and attributes that belong to an instance of a class. The Core Python Classes are - Integers, Floats, Strings, Booleans, Lists, Dictionaries, Tuples, Sets, Frozensets, Functions, Ranges, None, Custom-defined classes that come with libraries and libraries.

##### Defining classes with unique attributes and methods.
Python lets you define your own classes, each with its own special attributes and methods. This helps all different kinds of programmers to build reusable code that makes their work more efficient. How? The class itself is defined first, and then indented beneath it are the attributes and methods. This is what it means when an attribute or method 'belongs to class'. Attributes and methods are defined in the code for that class.
A class is like a blueprint for all things that share characteristics and behaviors. Whenever you create an object of a given class, you're creating an instance of that class. This is also known as instantiating the class. There are also instance attributes. These are attributes that you can assign when you instantiate an object. Classes can be very complex and contain many attributes and methods. Depending on the work you're doing as a data professional, knowledge about object-oriented programming will be helpful as you define your own classes, attributes, and methods to investigate patterns, relationships, and meaning data holds.

### Use Python syntax.
Python is a flexible programming language used in a wide range of fields, including software development, machine learning, and data analysis. Its also one of the most popular programming languages among data professionals, so getting familiar with its fundamental syntax and semantics will be useful for your future career. In this reading, you'll learn about Python's syntax and semantics.

##### The Language of Python.
People use language to communicate and give instructions to each other. Computers do the same thing, except computers use languages like Python, C++, and Java. So, in order to communicate instructions to the computer, programmers need to arrange ideas and concepts into a language it will understand.
Python syntax includes words that represent objects and commands, as well as punctuation that gives the words structure, hierarchy, and context. Together, the words and punctuation communicate ideas and processes; this is known as semantics.
Semantics - the meaning conveyed by the syntax. The best way to learn syntax and semantics is through exposure. Practice coding and become familiar and comfortable with reading other people's code. In addition, there are some general conventions that practitioners use to help maintain stylistic uniformity within the language.
Coding languages are similar to spoken language in that they have a way to classify words according to their function. Foe example, English sentences are composed of nouns, verbs, prepositions, etc.

Here are some basics:
- Variables - Represent data stored in strings, tuples, dictionaries, and objects.
- Keywords - Special words that are reserved for specific purposes and that can only be used for those purposes. Examples : in, not, or, for, while, return, if, else, etc.
- Operators - Symbols that perform operations on objects and values. Examples addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, exponential (** ), modulo (%), floor division (//), greater than, less than, equality (== ).
- Expressions - A combination of numbers, symbols, and variables to compute and return a result upon evaluation. 
Example of an expression:
```python
[1,2,3] + [2,4,6] # this is an expression.
```
- Functions - A group of related statements to perform a task and return a value.
- Conditional statements - Sections of code that direct program execution based on specific conditions.

### Naming rules and conventions.
When assigning names to objects, programmers adhere to a set of rules and conventions which help to standardize code and make it more accessible to everyone. Here are some naming rules and conventions that you should know:
	Names cannot contain spaces.
	Names may be a mixture of upper and lowercase characters.
	Names can't start with a number but may contain numbers after the first character.
	Variable names and functions should be written in snake_case, which means that all letters are lowercase and words are separated using an underscore.
	Descriptive names are better than cryptic abbreviations because they help other programmers (and you) read and interpret your code. For Example student_name is better than sn. It may feel excessive when you write it, but when you return to your code you'll find it much easier to understand.

##### the Zen of Python.
Written by *Tim Peters*, a Python programmer. Its a poem of guiding principles for coding in Python. Here it is.
	Beautiful is better than ugly.
	Explicit is better than implicit.
	Simple is better than complex.
	Flat is better than nested.
	Sparse is better than dense.
	Readability counts.
	Special cases aren't special enough to break the rules.
	Although practicality beats purity.
	Errors should never pass silently.
	Unless explicitly silenced.
	In the face of ambiguity, refuse the temptation to guess.
	There should be one--and preferably only one-- obvious way to do it.
	Although that may not be obvious at first unless you're Dutch.
	Now is better than never.
	Although never is often better than *right* now.
	If the implementation is hard to explain, it's a bad idea.
	If the implementation is easy to explain, it may be a good idea. 
	Namespaces are one honking idea --let's do more of those.

Its helpful to bookmark the PEP 8 Style Guide for Python so that you can reference it as needed. PEP stands for Python Enhancement Proposals. These are a running catalog of ways to improve or standardize Python as a language. Because Python is open source, PEP offers a framework to guide developers and build consensus around ideas. It's useful and trusted resource. If you learn the rules about naming objects and build a bank of resources that you can reference for guidance, you'll surely make progress as a Python learner. As you get more familiar with Python, you'll be able to communicate more efficiently with computers and do more with your data analysis tools.