Here, you'll learn the following:
	How to call functions and perform useful actions on your data.
	Writing conditional statements - this is decision making to a computer using instructions.
	Writing clean code that can be understood and reused by data professionals - reusability, modularity. Multi-step operations on your data & collaboration.
	Commenting.
	Operators - comparators and logical operators.
	Conditional statements.

#### Functions.
A function is a body of reusable code for performing specific processes or tasks.
Example of some built-in Python functions:

```python
print() # print() function writes text on the screen.
type() # type() function tells us the data type contained within a variable.
str() # str() function convert an object into a string.
```
#### Defining a function.
Use the *def* keyword. Its a keyword that defines a function at the start of the function block.
The name of the function comes next.
After that, we have the function arguments or parameters, followed by a colon at the end. They are always written within the parentheses. How you call/refer to them here is the same way you'll refer to them in the function's body.
Body of the function - is where we want the function to actually do. The lines are indented to the right and are hierarchical.
To finish writing the function, simply unindent the last line of code.

```python
# create a function called greetings
def greetings(name):
	print('Welcome ' + name + ' !')
	print('You are part of the team!')

# calling the function and passing a name as an argument.
greetings('Jessica!')
```
#### How to get values out of a function.
- return - A reserved keyword in Python that makes a function produce new results, which are saved for later use. 
For Example:
```python
def area_triangle(base, height):
	return base * height / 2

# suppose we want to add the areas of 2 triangles.
area_1 = area_triangle(5, 4)
area_2 = area_triangle(7, 8)

# the total areas are:
total_area = area_1 + area_2
total_area # this demos the power of the return statement.
```
The return statement enables us to combine function calls with other operations which makes the code reusable.
- Reusability - Defining code once and using it many times without having to rewrite it. It takes a lot less time and effort than recreating it every time.
###### Writing clean code.
In the earlier days of software development, it was common for software developers to write each line of code themselves. Now, its much more efficient to reuse code that others have written and put in online code repositories. Or we can develop modular code. Both of these practices speed up development and help data professionals focus on using code logic to meet business needs instead of doing rework. Reusability means defining code once and using it 

```python
# we are calculating a persons lucky number given the len(name) * 9. Then we print the mesage with the name and the number.
name = 'Marisol'
number = len(name) * 9
print('Hello ' + name + '. Your lucky number is ' + str(number))

name = 'Ardashir'
number = len(name) * 9
print('Hello ' + name + '. Your lucky number is ' + str(number))
```
Each time we want to perform the calculation, we change the variables of the name and the number. Notice in the above example, how there are exactly two lines that are the same. When you find code duplication in your script, its fine to check whether you can clean things up by using a function. Lets write a function of the above example to solve the code duplication problem.

```python
def lucky_number(name):
	number = len(name) * 9
	print('Hello ' + name + '. Your lucky number is ' + str(number))
```

This updated script above does the same job as the previous one but its cleaner, easier to understand and reusable.
- Modularity - the ability to write code in separate components that work together and that can be reused for other programs. Its related to reusability because it lets you reuse blocks in sections of code. Reusing code blocks can help you effectively collaborate with data engineers on larger projects so that they don't have to start their code from the beginning. 
- Refactoring - The process of restructuring code while maintaining its original functionality. This is the process of creating self-documenting code.
- Self-documenting code - Code written in a way that is readable and makes its purpose clear. This involves everything from selecting your variable names to writing clear, concise instructions.
- Commenting - its a useful practice because it helps you think about the process while documenting your workflow for other collaborators.
Clean code is useful for the rest of your team although it doesn't cause your script to fail. It can be reused saving you both time and effort. Code reused and modularity reduces errors, enhances team work and builds trust.
#### Use comments to scaffold your code.
Building good coding habits will enable you to use Python more effectively when using data to inform solutions to business problems. 
- Algorithm - A set of instructions for solving a problem or accomplishing a task. It helps you think like a programmer and translate instructions into Python code. An example of an algorithm is a recipe consisting a specific instructions for baking a cake or a bread. In a similar way, every computerized device is given instructions in the form of algorithms as hardware or software-based routines to perform its functions. That's why its important to know how to explain things logically to the computer. Breaking down a business problem into a format that can be understood by the computer. This is what is called thinking algorithmically. For example, a function is an algorithm. the best way to approach writing a new function is to break it into small simple pieces beginning with the comments. Outlining the comments in steps before you even write the code helps you to better understand the problem.

```python
# suppose we have a square fountain and we want to plant a grass border around that square.
# Let's write a function to calculate the amount of grass-seeds we'll need if we know the
# length of the side of the fountain and the width of the grass border.
def seed_calculator(fountain_side, grass_width):
	'''
		Calculate number of kg of grass seed needed for a border around a square fountain.
			
		parameters:
			fountain_side(num) - len of 1 side of the fountain.
			grass_width(num) - 	len of the grass border in meters.
		returns:
			seed(float): amount of seeds(kg) needed for grass border.
	'''
	# area of the fountain.
	fountain_area = fountain_side ** 2
	# total area.
	total_area = (fountain_side + 2 * grass_width) ** 2
	# area of the grass border.
	grass_border = total_area - fountaint_area
	# amount of seeds needed (35 g/sq.m).
	seeds = grass_area * 35
	# convert to kg.
	seeds = seeds / 1000
	return seeds
```
Above example, we have used comments to create a logical scaffolding before writing any code in the body of this function. We use comments to break down the thought process that outlines each section of code that we'll need in order to reach our goal. 
- Docstring or Document string- A string at the beginning of a function's body that summarizes the function's behavior and explains its arguments and return values.
#### Conditional statements.
###### Making comparisons using operators.
Boolean - A data type that has only two possible values, usually true or false. Origin George Bool, a 19th Century English Mathematician. Boolean type data is the result of every time you compare things in Python. Used everyday to control logical code in data. 
- Comparators - Operators that compare two values and produce Boolean values (True/False).
Types of comparators in Python:

```python
> # greater than
>= # greater than or equal to
< # less than
<= # less than or equal to
== # equal to
!= # not equal to
```

The results of comparators are used to make decisions about data assigned to these descriptions. 
- Logical operators - Operators that connect multiple statements together and perform more complex comparisons. Examples of these are 'and', 'or', and 'not'. They allow you to connect multiple statements together and perform more complex comparisons. 
	'and' - if used, the expression will be True if both the expressions are true. Returns False if either the expressions is not true.
	'or' -  if used, the expression will be True if either of the expressions is true. Returns False if both the expressions are not true.
Comparators and Logical operators are useful in the data analytics field for they make it possible to write more complex code.
##### Use if, elif, else statements to make decisions.
Branching - the ability of a program to alter its execution sequence. It uses if-statements based on certain conditions. Uses of branching:
	Bin data based on its value.
	Backup files.
	Restrict login access.
if - A reserved keyword that sets up a condition in Python. If-statements are also called conditional statements are also used in everyday life.

```python
def hint_username(username):
	if len(username) < 8:
		print('Invalid username. Must be atleast 8 characters long.')
	else:
		print('Valid username.')
```

The function above helps identify usernames that don't meet the criteria of having at least 8 characters.
The body of the if-block will only execute if the body evaluates to true, otherwise it does not execute. This means if you run the argument condition and the conditions are not met, the indented code beneath it gets ignored. 
else - A reserved keyword that executes when preceding conditions evaluates as False. It runs only when the condition of the if-statement is False.
Modulo - An operator that returns the remainder when one number is divided by another. The example below combines the modulo operator and if-statements.
```python
def is_even(number):
	if number % 2 == 0:
		return True
	return False
```

elif - A reserved keyword that executes subsequent conditions when the previous conditions are not true. A Pythonic way of saying that if the previous conditions are not true, try this way. 
```python
if weather is rain:
	print('carry an umbrella.')
elif weather is snow:
	print('wear a sweater.')
else:
	print('the weather looks great')
```
