Here, you'll learn how to use iterative statements, or loops, to automate repetitive tasks. You'll also learn how to manipulate strings using slicing, indexing, and formatting.
### While loops.
They allow you to perform an action or evaluation repeatedly until a given condition or requirement is met, and then they stop. This is an important step overall in programming. The while loops are used to process data that is why they are important. 
##### While loop syntax.
A while loop is a control structure that allows you to repeatedly execute a block of code for as long as a certain condition is true. The basic syntax of a while loop is as follows.
```python
# the following code block is not interactive.
while condition:
	# code block to execute.
```
The *condition* is a Boolean expression that is evaluated at the beginning of each iteration of the loop. If the condition is true, the code block executes. After the code block executes, the condition is evaluated again. The process continues until the condition is false, at which point the loop terminates and the program continues with the next statement after the loop. 
Here is an example.
```python
x = 1
while x < 100:
	print(x)
	x * 2
```
Explanation of the example: x = 1 when the loop begins. Because x < 100, the program prints the value of x, then multiplies x by 2. Then the condition is checked again, and because it is still True, the code inside the loop executes again. This process continues until x becomes 128, at which point the condition becomes False and the loop terminates.
##### Infinite loops.
If you make a mistake with your logic or syntax, it could result in an infinite loop that never terminates. If you get stuck in an infinite loop, don't worry. You can break out of it by interrupting the kernel.
##### break & continue.
It is possible to end a loop even if the conditional statement is still true. To do this, use the break statement.
Here is an example:
```python
x = 1
i = 0
while x < 100:
	if i == 5:
		break
	print(i, x)
	x = x*2
	i += 1
```
In this example, there is a variable i that acts as a counter. For each iteration of the loop, the program:
	1. Checks if x < 100.
	2. If it is, then the program checks if i == 5.
	3. If it does, the loop terminates because of the break statement. Otherwise, it prints the values of both i and x, doubles the value of x, and increments the value of i by 1.
	4. Repeats until x >= 100 or i = 5. In this case, the loop breaks when i becomes 5.

Its also possible to skip an iteration of the loop without executing the rest of the code inside the loop for the current iteration. to do this, use the *continue* statement. Here is an example:
```python
i = 0
while i < 10:
	if i % 3 != 0:
		print(i)
		i += 1
		continue
	i += 1
```
This example is a loop that prints all the numbers from 0 - 9 that aren't divisible by 3. For each iteration of the loop, the program:
	1. Checks if i < 10.
	2. If it is, then the program uses the % operator to check if i is evenly divisible by 3.
	3. If it is not, the program prints i, increments the value of i by 1, and then cycles back to the beginning to check that i < 10. This happens because of the continue statement. The final i += 1 doesn't execute, thus avoiding a double incrementation of i.
	4. But if step 2 evaluates i as evenly divisible by 3, nothing in the if block executes( so there's no print statement) and i is incremented by 1.
	5. Repeats until i becomes 10.
###### Key takeaways.
A while loop allows you to repeatedly execute a block of code while a certain condition is true. You can use the *break* statement to exit the loop prematurely, and the *continue* statement to skip the next iteration of the loop without executing the rest of the code in the current iteration.

### For loops.
For loops are like while loops, but instead of looping continuously until a condition is met, for loops iterate over each element of an iterable sequence, allowing you to perform an action or evaluation with each iteration. This is an important process in programming. Data professionals use for loops to process data.
##### For loops syntax.
A for loop is a control structure that allows you to execute a block of code the same number of times as there are elements in an iterable sequence. Some examples of iterable sequences are strings, lists, tuples, dictionaries, sets. The basic syntax of a for loop is as follows:
```python
for item in iterable_sequence:
	# Code block to be executed for each value in iterable_sequence
```
The iterable_sequence variable can be any iterable data type, and item is a variable whose name is arbitrary --you decide it. However, there are some conventions that you'll encounter when naming this variable. If you are iterating over characters in a string, you'll frequently encounter the variable char. If you are iterating over a list of numbers, you'll frequently encounter the variable n or num. Its helpful to give this variable a name so readers of your code understand what kind of information is being looped over. So for a variable called names that contain a list of names, you might write:
```python
for name in names:
```
A note about the behavior of this variable -- its value is reassigned for each iteration of the loop, and it persists even after the loop terminates.
Here is an example:
```python
num = 5
y = [1,2,3]
for num in y:
	print(num)

print(num)
```
Notice that *num* exists as a variable before the for loop begins. The for loop's first iteration reassigns its value with that of the first element in the sequence y. This reassignment occurs with each iteration of the loop. When the loop terminates, the variable persists, and it contains the value it had after the final iteration of the loop.
### The range() function.
The for loop allows you to create a loop that performs exactly the number of iterations needed for the data structure you're looping over. However, sometimes you need to perform a task a set number of times, but you don't already have an iterable object to loop over. Or, sometimes you need to generate a known, regular sequence of numbers. This is where the range() function is useful.
The range() function is a function that takes 3 arguments: start, stop, and step. Its output is an object belonging to the range class. If you only include 1 argument, it'll be interpreted as the stop value. The start and step values by default will be 0 and 1, respectively. If you include 2 arguments, they will be interpreted as the start and stop values(again, with step being one by default). Note that the stop value is not included in the range that is returned.
```python
for i in range(3):
	print(i)
```

```python
for n in range(2, 5):
	print(i)
```

```python
for even_num in range(2, 11, 5):
	print(even_num)
```

You'll learn that the range() function is very useful, for example, when creating numbered lists or performing operations on certain indices of an object.

### Nested loops.
Sometimes you'll need to extract information from nested structures eg from a list of lists. One way of doing this is by using nested loops. A nested loop is a loop within another loop. You can have an infinite number of nested loops, but it becomes more confusing to read and understand the more nested loops you add. 
Here is an example of one loop nested in another.
```python
students = [['Igor', 'Solokov'], ['Riko', 'Miyakazi'], ['Tuva', 'Johansen']]
for student in students:
	for name in student:
		print(name)
	print()
```

In this example, the students variable contains a list of 3 lists. Each list contains 2 elements: a given name and a surname. The first loop iterates over the inner lists. The second(nested) for loop iterates over each name in each list and prints the name. After each iteration of the outer loop, the program uses an empty print statement to print a new line.
###### Key takeaways.
A *for* loop allows you to execute a block of code the same number of times as there are elements in an iterable sequence. The *range()* function is useful for creating a defined iterable sequence. And nested loops are loops within loops that give you even greater power and control over how your code may execute. These are powerful tools that can be used in many different ways to solve a variety of problems that you'll encounter as a data professional.

### Strings.
##### String indexing and slicing.
Strings are an important class of data because they represent text. Data professionals encounter strings all the time, so it's important to become familiar with different ways of manipulating and working with them. Here, we will review string formatting techniques.
##### String formatting.
Indexing refers to accessing a single element of a sequence by its position. In Python, the first element of any sequence has an index of zero. This means that Python uses zero-based indexing. Other programming languages uses this system but not all. Example of languages that uses one-based indexing are R, Julia, and SAS. When doing indexing, use square brackets.
```python
my_string = 'Mississippi half-step'
print(my_string[0]) # prints item on index 0 which is 'M'

my_list = [1, 'unladen', 'swallow']
print(my_list[1]) # prints item on index 1 which is 'unladen'

print(my_list[-1]) # prints item on index -1 which is 'swallow'
```
If you try to select an index that is out of range of what the object contains, you'll get an IndexError. 
```python
my_list = [1, 'unladen', 'swallow']
print(my_list[3]) # prints out IndexError because of out of range object.'
```
##### Slicing.
Slicing refers to accessing a range of elements from a sequence. Use square brackets containing two indices separated by a colon. Here are some examples:
```python
new_string = 'pining for the fjords'
print(new_string[0:3])
print(new_string[:3])
```

These examples are being used to produce the same result. When the starting index is omitted it's implied to be zero. The process follows the same logic when the ending index is omitted.
```python
new_string = 'pining for the fjords'
print(new_string[6:21])
print(new_string[6:])
print(len(new_string))
```
Again, there are two statements that are syntactically different but still produce the same substring. When the ending is omitted, its implied value is the length of the sequence.
Finally, the code will throw an IndexError if you try to index a sequence at an index number outside the scope of the elements; this is not the case for slicing. For example:
```python
new_string = 'pining for the fjords'
print(new_string[6:100])
```
Although the indexing was 100 --far beyond the scope of the indices in the string-- the computer returned a substring that ended with the string's final element.
###### Key takeaways.
Indexing and slicing are powerful tools in Python that allows you to access specific elements or parts of a sequence. Both indexing and slicing use square brackets. Remember that in a slice the starting index is inclusive and the stopping index is exclusive, and that negative indices count from the end of the sequence. With this tools, you can manipulate strings and other iterable sequences to perform a wide variety of operations, making you a more proficient data professional.

### String formatting and regular expression.
Here, we introduce string formatting techniques and regex. Strings represent textual information.
##### String formatting.
String formatting uses the *format()* method which belongs to the string class. This method formats and inserts specific substrings into designated places within a larger string. It's useful when you have reusable template text into which you want to insert specific changeable values, for example. The *format()* method is also useful when assigning the strings used to label charts and graphs you make.
Here is an example:
```python
x = 'values'
y = 100

print(''' String formatting lets you insert {} into strings. 
They can even be numbers, like {}'''.format(x, y))
```
Notice the syntax:
- The *format()* function inserts its arguments into the braces, {} within the string that's attached to. The order of insertion follows the order of the arguments. Another thing to learn is that enclosing a string in triple quotes lets you break the string over multiple lines.
The *format()* function can also insert values into braces using explicitly assigned keyword names, which allow you to mix up the order of the function's arguments without changing the order of their insertion into the final string.
For example:
```python
var_a = 'A'
var_b = 'B'
print('{a}, {b}'.format(b=var_b, a=var_a))
```
In the example above, because the arguments were named, it doesn't matter the order of the arguments.

You can also include the arguments' index numbers within the braces to indicate which arguments get inserted in specific spots: For example:
```python
var_a = 'A'
var_b = 'B'
print('{1}, {0}'.format(var_a, var_b))
print('{0}, {1}'.format(var_a, var_b))
```

You can have as many arguments as you want: For example:
```python
print('{}, {}, {}, {}, {}, {}, {}, {}, {}, {}, {}, {}, {}, {}')
```

And you can repeat arguments' indices: For example:
```python
print('{0}, {1}, {0}).format('abbra', 'cad')
```

The string *format()* method is a versatile and convenient way to take values that are stored in different variables and insert them into a string.
#### Literal string interpolation (f-strings).
Available using Python 3.6+. It further minimizes the syntax required to embed expressions into strings. They are called f-strings because the expressions always begin with f (or F --they are the same).
For example:
```python
var_a = 'A'
var_b = 'B'
print(f'{var_a} + {var_b}')
print(f'{var_a + var_b}')
print(f'var_a = {var_a} \nvar_b = var_b')
```
In these examples, the braces still function as the way to indicate where values should be inserted into the string, but they allow you to make the insertion directly, without having to call the *format()* method.
#### Float formatting options.
String formatting can format their appearance. There are many options to list here, but the Python string documentation is a good place to review these techniques. Here are some of the most useful:
To use these options, build your expression within braces as follows.
	1. The float variable is what is being formatted.
	2. A colon (:) separates what's being formatted from the syntax used to format it.
	3. . number indicates the desired precision.
	4. A letter indicates the presentation type.
For example:
```python
num = 1000.987123
f'{num:.2f}'
```
This example uses the *f* presentation type to specify that the number contained in the *num* variable should be rounded to two decimal places beyond the decimal.
Here are some presentation types:
	- 'e' - means scientific notation. For a given precision *p*, formats the number in scientific notation with the letter *e* separating the coefficient from the exponent. The coefficient has one digit before the *p* digits after the decimal point, for a total of *p + 1* significant digits. With no precision given, *e* uses a precision of *6* digits after the decimal point for float, and shows all coefficient digits for decimal.
	- 'f' - Fixed-point notation. For a given precision *p*, formats the number as a decimal number with exactly *p* digits following the decimal point.
	- '%' - Percentage. Multiplies the number by 100 and displays in fixed (*'f'*) format, followed by a percent sign.
Here are some examples:
```python
num = 1000.987123
print(f'{num:.3e}')

decimal = 0.2497856
f'{decimal:.4%}'
```

#### String methods.
As one of the primary object classes in Python, strings have many built-in methods designed to facilitate working with them. They are too many, but some of the most useful methods include:
```python
str.count(sub[, start[, end]]) 
```
 
Return the number of non-overlapping occurrences of substring *sub* in the range *[start, end]*. For example:
```python
my_string = 'Happy birthday'

print(my_string.count('y'))
print(my_string.count('y', 2, 7))
```

- `str.find(sub)`
Return the lowest index in the string where substring *sub* is found. Return -1 if *sub* is not found. For example:
```python
my_string = 'Happy birthday'

print(my_string.find('birth')
```

- `str.join()`
Returns a string which is the concatenation of the strings in iterable. The separator between elements is the string providing this method. For example:
```python
separator_string = ''
iterable_of_strings = ['Happy', 'birthday', 'to', 'you']

separator_string.join(iterable_of_strings)
```

- `str.partition(sep)`
Splits the string at the first occurrence of *sep*, and return a 3-tuple containing the part before the separator, the separator itself, and the part after the separator. If the separator is not found, return a 3-tuple containing the string itself, followed by two empty strings. For example:
```python
my_string = 'https://www.google.com'

my_string.partition('.')
```

- `str.replace(old, new[, count])`
Return a copy of the string with all occurrences of substring *old* replaced by *new*. If the optional argument *count* is given, only the first *count* occurrences are replaced. For example:
```python
my_string = 'https://www.google.com'

my_string.replace('google', 'youtube')
```
- `str.split([sep])`
Return a list of words in the string, using sep(optional) as the delimiter string. If no sep is given, whitespace characters are used as the delimiter. Any number of consecutive whitespaces would indicate a split point, so '  ' (a single whitespace) would split the same way as '     ' (two or more whitespaces).
```python
my_string = 'Do you know the muffin man?'

my_string.split()
```

#### Regular Expression.
Also known as regex. It refers to techniques that advanced data professionals use to modify and process string data. Regex works by matching patterns in Python. It allows you to search for specific patterns of text within a string of text. It is used extensively in web scraping, text processing and cleaning, and data analysis.
```python
# import re module.
import re

pattern = 'regex_pattern'

match = re.search(pattern)
```

```python
# import re module.
import re

my_string = 'Three sad tigers swallowed wheat in a field'

re.search('wall', my_string)
```
The example returns a match object that contains information about the search. In this case, it tells you that the substring 'wall' does occur in the string from indices 18-22. Regex is especially useful because it allows you a very high degree of customization when performing your searches. Regex has a large catalogue of special expressions that let you search for substrings that will only match if, for example, they are followed by certain characters, or if they don't contain a certain set of characters. It can get very complex. Depending on the work you do as a data professional, you may find yourself exploring regular expressions to analyze and process your data.
#### Key takeaways.
String formatting is the process of inserting specific substrings into designated places within a larger string. Often, the inserted substrings get processed and formatted a certain way. There are multiple ways of using string formatting to help you process strings. These include *format()* method, literal string interpolations -- or f-strings-- and regex.
The methods you use will depend on what your data demands and your own personal preferences, but it's important to be familiar with the most common techniques used by data professionals.