Here, you'll begin with an introduction to the Google Advanced Data Analytics certificate. Then, you'll explore the history of data science and ways that data science helps solve problems today. 
### Welcome to the Google Data Analytics Certificate.
From the consumer end, Data analytics is used in use of apps, maps, online shopping, video hosting etc. A lot of data is being generated, about 1.7mb/s on average, and therefore there is high demand for people who can organize and interpret the stories that are locked within data. Here are definition of terms we are going to be using:
- Data Professional - A person who is capable of exploring, cleaning, selecting, analyzing, and visualizing data. They may also be comfortable with coding techniques used in statistics, machine learning, developing algorithmic thinking, and/or building machine learning (or ML) models. 
- Machine Learning (or ML) - is an alternative to automation, expressing the way you want a task done using data instead of explicit instructions.
Data professional work spans industries and its impact affects a multitude of products and services.
### Certificate Overview
As computing power has accelerated, industries has sought to increase the amount of data available to them. They're incorporating data professionals to better understand their customers and improve their products and services.-hence the demand of data analytics skills. As a result, data professionals need to understand the challenges and possibilities of machine learning, build accurate predictive models, and clearly articulate their findings.
What you'll understand by the end of this program:
- Python programming.
- Preparation for data analysis.
- Utilize statistics with data.
- Build predictive models.
- Optimize machine learning capabilities.
### Health habits for course completion
- Plan your time - Setting regular study times and following them, using a calendar, timetable, list daily plan in order to set achievable goals, find a space that allows you to focus when your daily plan.
- Work at your own pace - work at the pace that works best for you.
- Be curious - Act on ideas that gets you excited. Ask questions, search for more details online, take notes on your discoveries, explore the links that interest you.
- Take notes - for remembrance, making connection between topics, better understanding those topics.
- Review exemplars - they are completed assignments that fully meet an activity's criteria, so that you compare your work to the completed exemplars. They are for guidance and inspiration.
- Chat responsibly - with other learners in the forum.
- Update your profiles - Online on LinkedIn and other professionals' websites.
### Careers in Data Science
### Data discourse over the years.
Data science and Data analytics are used interchangeably in the industry although these fields are and can be quite different in their scope. Learn the similarities and differences in order to know where your skills fit. Here, you'll learn more about data science, data analytics, and how the data profession has evolved over time.
##### What is data science vs. data analytics.
- Data Science
	- an entire field dedicated to making data useful.
	- a data scientist takes raw data to develop new ways to model data to understand the unknown.
	- often, their job responsibilities incorporate various components of computer science, predictive analytics, statistics, machine learning.
	- works with large amounts of data that require expertise to organize and navigate.
	- produces broad insights that concentrate on which questions should be asked about data.
	- confronts what is unknown by using advanced techniques to make predictions about the future.
- Data Analytics
	- a subfield of the larger data science discipline.
	- its aim is to create methods to capture, process, and organize data to uncover actionable insights for current problems.
	- analysts focus on processing already existing datasets, and establishing best ways to present this data.
	- data analysts rely on statistics and data modelling to solve problems and offer recommendations that lead to immediate improvements.
	- emphasizes discovering answers to questions already being asked.
	- determines actionable insights that can be immediately based on existing queries.
##### The connection between Data Science and Data Analytics.
Both share a fundamental goal of discovering insights that can be used to lead an organization to improve and grow. They are also closely connected with information gathered through interactions within the measurable world. As data projects become more complicated, organizations are discovering the advantages of assembling data teams, bringing data analysts and data scientists together. How? Through collaboration--using similar tools, software, programming languages etc. to solve complicated data projects. Additionally, the responsibilities of data scientists and data analysts are impacted by a company's resources, budgetary constraints, and other factors within the company or industry. These commonalities between data science and data analytics within the workspace explain why practitioners and industry professionals often use the terms interchangeably. This has also extended to job postings.
##### The data professional in the data career space.
- Data professional - a term used when referring to data scientists and analysts collectively.
- Data analytics professional - is used to highlight positions where the majority of tasks focus on data analytical processes. 
- The data career workspace - functions as an inclusive term referencing the spectrum of jobs and careers in data science and related areas.
- Data stewardship - the practices of an organization that ensure that data is accessible, usable, and safe.
- Edge computing - a way of distributing computational tasks over a bunch of nearby processors (i.e. computers). Its good for speed and resiliency and doesn't depend on a single source of computation.
- Quantum computing - a type of computing that employs collective properties of quantum mechanics.
##### The data career space over time.
This field has evolved over time as technology, data storage, data analysis, and communication has changed. Progress means data professionals have to learn to adapt and evolve to build and define careers within this space--and understanding how data career workspace has evolved can help you do just that:
##### 1965
- Technology: Computations were still done by hand; companies were just starting to invest in new computing technologies to assist analysts. Desktop calculators replaced room-sized computers. Users could backup complex mathematical operations onto magnetic cards and print the results.
- Data storage: Simple punch cards stored programming information. Businesses allocated physical space to store the thousands of data punch cards regular computer usage would generate. Larger corporations upgraded to magnetic tape reels that could store up to 3 megabytes (equivalent of 50,000) but still required a lot of storage space within an office.
- Data analysis: As computer technology reduced in size and cost, more companies began to pivot away from doing computation work by hand.
- Communication: Documents and messages were hand delivered within offices. There were new telephone systems that allowed multiple incomes and outgoing lines up to 30 extensions. The electronic typewriter transformed documentation and correspondence.
##### 1985
- Technology: Desktops were now small enough for users to have a personal computer. Phone lines become the superhighways of communication. The scanning fax machine became a necessity for businesses allowing them to send and receive documents.
- Data storage: The floppy disk replaced data punch cards, allowing 360 kb of data storage. The average internal hard drive capacity was 10 megabytes.
- Data analysis: The electronic spreadsheet revolutionized data organization. These programs first emulated traditional financial ledgers.
- Communication: Internal electronic messages or emails were being used by government agencies, universities, and defense/military industries to communicate.
##### 2005
- Technology: Internet access was common globally within the urban areas. High speed connectivity replaced dial-up connections. Businesses become aware of the usefulness of their collected user data.
- Data storage: Large-scale companies began digitizing and storing data within cloud services. Data stored in file cabinets were slowly being converted into data archives. Flash drives reached the market offering a gigabyte of portable storage that could easily fit within a pocket.
- Data analysis: Companies employed data analysis and predictive modeling as primary business elements. Customer interaction yield datasets and data analysis opportunities, creating large repositories of unstructured data. Social media significantly elevated the need for tools, technologies, and analytics techniques to gather useful information from unstructured data.
- Communication: Inter-department collaboration, worldwide email, and instant messaging become available on smart devices.
##### Today
- Technology: Augmented and virtual reality offer interactive experiences, enriched by computer generated information. The internet of things (IoT) connects a growing number of devices and systems. Edge computing is becoming common practice; its good for speed and resiliency.
- Data storage: Quantum computing is being developed to increase processing and storage and solve problems that are too complex for classical computers.
- Data analysis: Artificial intelligence is helping to speed up the rate of innovation by augmenting human capabilities. This technology resides at the intersection between social and technological issues. Technological advances continue to be inspired by biological and psychological knowledge about how human process and learn information.
- Communication: Virtual meetings and online messaging have become commonplace. Task management software is helping organizations facilitate the completion of projects, allowing workers across the globe to work asynchronously.
### Explore your data toolbox.
This includes but is not limited to: Programming languages--Python & R, data storytelling, graphical interface for visualizations--Tableau, PowerBI & Spreadsheets, effective communication.
When used together, these items help build and tell stories with data which can then inform, influence and impact business decisions. Remaining determined and developing proper skills is essential to personal and professional transformation.