Here, we are looking at how data professionals manage and analyze their data and how data driven insights can help organizations.
Knowledge is power. The power to improve your businesses, work, professional life, and the world around you.
### Data-driven careers
##### Create a data-driven business solution
A customer engineer is the bridge between the technical and business components or aspects of corporate enterprises. They help customers leverage their technology to meet their business needs. The projects here focuses on consolidating information across different systems. To make sure there is ease of access and visualization can happen in real time. Technologies such as VR (virtual reality) are used as the main visualization component.
When working in projects of this nature remain confident in yourself. While you might be new to this new role or this company, you're coming with skills that are repeatable, that are transferable. Whether it'd be the way you approach and problem solve, whether it'd be the rapport you're able to build with your stakeholders and the soft skills and ensuring that you can build those relationships or even when it comes to communication and writing a succinct and concise email.
There are going to be ways where you're going to take what you've done before and apply them in your new role. You might think outside the box, but you'll get there.
##### Data driven careers drive modern business.
Data professionals determine which data streams are most important to specific business projects, challenges and initiatives. They identify key goals for the future. They give their organizations the ability to take meaningful action by re-imagining processes and improving operations.
To do all this, data teams require individuals with diverse skills, knowledge and interest. There are diverse roles, responsibilities and projects in diverse industries. Data careers can be loosely categorized into two complimentary types of work, Technical and Strategic.
###### Technical category - where there's heavy emphasis on technical skills:
- Work (Examples of these professionals): machine learning engineer, and statisticians.
- Expertise: math, statistics, computing, building models, making predictions.
- Tools used: R, Python.
- Function: extract value from business datasets, result in a solution that has a direct positive impact.
- Role: An Expert Data Analyst - explores vast and complex datasets to identify directions worth pursuing in the first place, organizes data science efforts as efficiently as possible bridging the gap between technical and strategic data professionals.
###### Strategic category - maximize information to guide how a business work:
- Work - BI professionals, technical project manager.
- Expertise - Business, Project manager.
- Function - maximize the info to guide how a business work.
- Role - they use their skills to interpret information for an organization's operations, finance, research and development. Their work aligns closely with the overall business strategy, involves seeking solutions to problems through data analytics.
- Industries - Health, finance, agriculture, manufacturing.
Sometimes, you'll find a company has roles that blend specialized technical knowledge with strategic data expertise, often an unusual and very creative ways. Lets consider some examples of how to transform industries such as healthcare, finance, manufacturing, and agriculture. The world of finance was an early adopter of the power of data science, and with the way information drives this industry, its easy to understand why.
###### Finance: 
Data professionals help financial institutions: 
- assess investment risks, 
- monitor market trends, 
- detect anomalies to reduce fraud, and 
- create a more stable financial system overall.
###### Healthcare
Data analytics is also key in healthcare. Here, data benefits can actually be life saving. Data analytics is helping healthcare organizations:
- process large amounts of clinical data,
- supports the early detection of a health condition,
- leads to more precise diagnosis.
###### Manufacturing
Data has a large impact in manufacturing. Data professionals:
- predict when to perform predictive maintenance to avoid production line breakdowns,
- use data to maximize quality assurance and defect tracking,
- use artificial intelligence models to help respond to logistical issues and reduce delivery truck miles on the road, advancing key sustainability goals.
- In a time when supply chains are global, data enables clear, and near real time communication with suppliers, retailers, and other network partners.
###### Agriculture
Data professionals are also advancing approaches to agriculture:
- With data insights, farmers develop new ways to approach crop production, livestock care, forestry, and agriculture.
- The inclusion of autonomous machinery, tractors, and irrigation systems is improving harvesting technologies as well.
As a data professional, don't miss an opportunity to learn from someone in real life. Ask business owners, store managers, and client support professionals about how they use data each and every day.
##### Profiles for data professionals
Data analysts in technical roles transform raw data into something useful for decision-making. Strategic data professionals focus on maximizing information to guide the business they are working for.
###### Data scientists and Data analysts.
These are roles that work directly with data. They gather, clean, analyze, and share insights from data with stakeholders. An increasing number of industries turn to data analysis to create insights that inform various tasks like guide decision making, identify user preferences, or determine how to use resources more effectively. Their key attributes are:
- What they do -  uncover trends, patterns and insights from data.
- How they do it - employ advanced modelling and statistical analytical techniques. Entry-level roles may not require considerable data analysis experience and be less restrictive about requiring those hired to hold a traditional degree.
- Roles - guide decision-making, identify user preferences, determine how to use resources more effectively.
- Sample job titles - data scientist, marketing analyst, data analyst, AI analyst, Business analyst.
###### Data management and Infrastructure.
These roles are largely responsible for systems that distribute data and maintain its integrity. They support data analysts. Their main responsibility is to ensure the functionality of data systems and the compliance with all regulations involving data security and ethics.
Key attributes are:
- What they do: Manage data sources and the overall data infrastructure.
- How they do it: Work with the tools and databases used to manage data within a business.
- Some sample job titles includes - Data engineer, technical engineer, data steward, IT architect, data manager.
###### Business Intelligence (BI).
Data analytics and BI professionals use data to create insights that inform decision-making. A major difference is that business intelligence is more focused on creating processes and information channels that transform relevant data. Business intelligence professionals create tables, reports, and dashboards that empower stakeholders giving them access to data they need to inform the entire decision-making process on a continual basis. These roles often serve as a complement to core data analytics/data science professionals.
Key attributes:
- What they do - perform predictive analytics that enable organizations determine likely future trends.
- How they do it - create tables, reports, dashboards that empower their organization.
- Roles - BI architect, BI analyst, BI solution developer, BI software engineer, Data viz and BI analyst.
##### Additional roles for data professionals.
###### Product development teams
The professionals in these roles manage a portfolio of customer and stakeholder analytics projects and initiatives. They often manage the analytical strategy for the organization. In these roles, experience is most likely required, and responsibilities are larger and more global.
What they do:
- they manage analytical strategy within a project team.
How they do their jobs: 
- They are less hands on with data analysis, serving as the person a data scientist or analyst would report to.
Sample job titles 
- product manager, product developer, product lead, digital product manager, customer product manager.
###### C-Suite
These are high ranking executives within an organization. 'C' in c-suite stands for chief. In general, there's a trend for the c-suite to build data-driven decision making into their processes. Expectations are similar to those of analysts or scientists, that is they should be familiar with data and analytics.
Key attributes:
- responsible for data and data professionals across an entire organization.
How they do it:
- they are decision makers found at the top end of the company's hierarchy.
Sample job titles 
- Chief marketing officer (CMO), 
- Chief data officer (CDO), 
- Chief analytics officer (CAO),
- Chief information officer (CIO), 
- Chief data scientists (CDS).
###### Key takeaways
There are a wide variety of roles and responsibilities in the data professional career space. People in these roles collaborate with groups of professionals with diverse expertise on data analysis projects. Having a general understanding of the roles and responsibilities of data professionals can help inform your job search. This information can serve as a reference that can help you understand the needs and expectations of companies as you navigate through job postings. Take inventory of any transferrable skills you may already possess from educational or professional experience.
### Where data makes a difference in the future.
The data analytics field is dynamic spanning a variety of industries. There are great opportunities for data professionals searching for new job prospects across a spectrum of career fields. As you start to think about your won future role in data analytics, it can help to investigate how data is being used within different industries. In this reading, you'll consider some examples of industries and how data analytics helps guide them. You'll also consider the future of data analytics and how the field is still evolving.
There are so many different industries taking advantage of data analytics in so many different ways. Here is just a sample of some of these industries and how they use data:

| Industry                                      | Overview                                                                                                                                                                   | How data is used                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
| --------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| App-driven business (sharing economy service) | Facilitates users acquiring, providing, or sharing access to goods and services, often through online or app-based communitites.                                           | maintenance, content delivery, using ML models for notification systems.                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               |
| Automotive                                    | Includes industries associated with the production, wholesaling, retailing, and maintenance of motor vehicles.                                                             | supply chain control, improving production line performance and more efficient vehicles, enhancing vehicle safety and new features.                                                                                                                                                                                                    |
| Cybersecurity                                 | Protects networks, devices, and data from unauthorized access or criminal use and the practice of maintaining confidentiality, integrity, and availability of information. | locating weak points within network systems, defending against security attacks, detecting data breaches through logic, models, and data tools, using AI to improve the ability to identify attacks and responding to them.                                                                                                            |
| Digital marketing                             | Assists in advertising and promotional efforts of companies using the internet and online technologies.                                                                    | translate customer interaction into actionable business data, predicting user behaviors to personalize content and offers, understanding patterns and trends that guide innovations, determining the return on investment (ROI) of marketing efforts.                                                                                  |
| Energy                                        | Includes companies that explore, produce, refine, market, store and transport both renewable and non-renewable energy resources.                                           | Analyzing real-time data from power systems and monitoring devices, optimizing technologies, monitoring power grids, and predicting failures, preventing accidents and malfunctions.                                                                                                                                                   |
| Gaming                                        | Hosts an estimated 2.7 billion gamers worldwide, facilitating the interaction of players across the globe.                                                                 | Designing world-building and character creation systems, monitoring character engagement and how the environment reacts to player input, optimizing gameplay by identifying potential new features or upgrades, regulating in-game purchases and fraud detection systems, personalizing market campaigns.                              |
| Streaming media and entertainment             | Provides access to live and recorded content on-demand, delivered via the internet to computers, smart devices, and mobile devices.                                        | Analyzing and monitoring user interactions to better understand customer sentiment, matching users with advertisers with real-time analytics, guiding future content decisions, personalizing marketing campaigns.                                                                                                                     |
| Telecommunications                            | Primarily involves operating and providing access to facilities for the transmission of voice, data, text, sound, and audio.                                               | maintenance of telecommunications networks, optimizing pricing models, target advertisement and incentive campaigns as well as fraud detection, analyzing customer data to customer subscriber plans.                                                                                                                                  |
| Travel and tourism                            | Encompasses a variety of services from transportation, accommodations, booking, etc.                                                                                       | marketing to individuals based on their previous travel or searched destinations, ML systems that can adjust a traveler's itinerary based on set factors including weather and availability, generating recommendations based on personal preferences and location-based discounts, managing reservations and processing transactions. |

###### Data trends for the future.
Emerging field with a wide range of exciting opportunities. Big data is getting bigger. The need for people to understand, prioritize, manage, and analyze that information is not slowing down in any industry. Business will depend on data for simple and complex techniques. Data storage is being done and sharing is across the organization. Company reliant on insights from data and this means opportunities for data analytics professionals.
###### Innovative technologies.
In data accessibility, usage now and in the future, new tools and data solutions are there to be explored by the businesses. AI will continue to have a large impact on business. It will help companies boost operational efficiency through automating processes. AI, ML, BI & Automation to deliver more personalized services to customers. 
Enabling edge computing - AI & ML are only as equitable and inclusive as the people who create and train these systems. Stay up to date with the latest trends across different industries. Data will continue to be generated, new systems developed, allowing data professionals to learn and develop new skills.
### Leverage data analysis in non-profits.
A non-profit is a group that further a social cause that provide a benefit to the public. Become a data volunteer. Some organizations examples: D.S for good foundation, UNICEF, Data Kind, Hackathon volunteering.
Questions to ask:
	- How can I contribute to global efforts, including my local community as a data professional?
	- Gain experience and support a cause.
	- How can you help them to be more effective and allow them to anticipate and respond to their greatest areas of need?
### Data career skills.
The top skills needed for a data career.
- Love for data, a desire to solve problems, analytical skills, storytelling, decision making.
Attributes applicable across data-driven careers
- a mix of business sense and knowledge in gathering, manipulating, and analyzing data.
- interpersonal skills - communication and building relationships, active listening, data cleaning, critical thinking skills, data analysis.
- advanced skills - machine learning, models, prediction.
- additional skills - being coachable, a passion for data analysis, life long learning, problem-solver.
### Important ethical considerations for data professionals.
How to protect our organizations, manage and protect data. This has to do with communication exchanges between a company and its customers. Privacy and PII.
PII - stands for personally identifiable information. It permits the identity of an individual to be inferred by either directly or indirectly. Things like ID, Social Security, biometric info. This is sensitive information and must be managed carefully.
Aggregated information - data from a significant number of users that has eliminated personal information. By aggregating data and removing PII, protects people and gives them more control over their own data.
Consider bias when collecting any data. There can be a multitude of possible interpretations for every data insight. Use samples.
### Critical data security and privacy principles.
Ensure that privacy and security of data is maintained throughout its lifetime. Privacy matters, and this means preserving a data subject's information and activity any time a data transaction occurs. Also called information privacy or data protection.
Strategies to maintain privacy:
	- Data anonymization - is the process of protecting people's privacy or sensitive data by eliminating PII.
	- Data aggregation - combine details from a significant number of users in terms of summary or totals information is shown in groups.
### The practices and principles of good data stewardship.
Data stewardship - the practice of ensuring that data is accessible, usable, and safe.
Best practices:
- Respect privacy, be cautious of unintended harm, avoid creating or reinforcing bias, consider inclusivity, uphold high standards of scientific excellence, data stewardship and ethics conversations.
### Working in the field.
The data professional career space.
Data tasks and responsibilities are dependent on an organization's data, team structure and how they make use of insights and analytics. Specific vs. broad scope (Job tasks). Technical and strategic skills to help others make informed decisions. The most technical work leading up to the birthing of data may comfortably be called data engineering. Everything done once some data have arrived is called data science.
### Build the perfect data team.
5 principles for data team building.
1. Adaptability
	- tools, networks, storage options, data platforms
2. Activation
	- data literacy, routines, collaboration, interpersonal skills, promote understanding among peers and colleagues, positive professional relationships, ability to share insights within the organization.
3. Standardization
	- set criteria for normalizing best practices and procedures, a culture of collaboration, become a problem-solver.
4. Accountability
	- A 'paper trail' that allows examination of their entire process. Adds transparency, the ability to explain, security to data and team projects, eliminate layers within an organization, aligning business goals and customer values.
5. Business Impact
	- planning stage, a thoughtful approach, considerations beyond data analysis, effective communication, track record, strong interpersonal skills, can help an organization earn trust. 
	- focus on clearly communicating with stakeholders, maintain a commitment to consistency between what you have promised and what you will deliver.
### Building a perfect data team
#### Introduction.
Large organizations often have more data needs, requiring the creation of teams to take on projects. This is how organizations build data analytics teams and look at some best practices when constructing them.
#### Designing data teams.
It developed over time and largely grew out of necessity. Organizations have separated data functions from IT functions as the  wealth of information grew. Also, data-related tasks have become more specialized.
#### Data professional profiles within large organizations.
Many employers are looking for more than data professionals. They are looking for project stakeholders, dependable team members, and great co-workers. 
The profiles of data professionals will help you understand their functions within the organization and the data project.
There are technical and strategic roles for data analytics professionals. Data analysts in technical roles transform raw data into something useful for decision making. Strategic data analytics professionals focus on maximizing information to guide the business they are working for.
#### Categories for data careers
Technical category
- Role: 
	- ML engineers, Statisticians.
- Expertise: 
	- Math, Statistics, Computing.
- What they do: 
	- Build models & make predictions.
- Tools: 
	- R, Python.
- How: 
	- Help their teams extract value from business data sets.

- Role: 
	- Expert data analyst.
- What they do: 
	- Exploring vast and complex data sets to identify directions worth pursuing in the first place. 
- How: 
	- Ensure an organizations DS efforts are directed as efficient as possible. 
	- Bridge the gap between other technical data professionals & the strategic work.

#### Strategic category
- Role: 
	- BI professionals, 
	- technical project managers.
- What they do: 
	- Use their skills to interpret information that affects an organization's operations, finance, research and development etc.
	- work aligns closely to the overall business strategy and it involves seeking solutions to problems through data analytics.
	- they maximize information to guide how a business works.
- Sometimes a company has roles that blends specialized technical knowledge with strategic data expertise.
#### How data professionals use their expertise to transform industries.
##### Example of industries:
Finance,
		- assess risks
		- monitor market trends
		- reduce fraud
		- create a more stable financial system overall
agriculture, 
		- develop new approaches to crop production, livestock care, forestry & agric.
		- improve harvesting technologies
health care, 
		- process clinical data.
		- supports early detection of a health condition.
		- more precise diagnoses.
manufacturing
		- perform preventative maintenance to avoid production line breakdowns.
		- maximize quality assurance and defect tracking.
		- AI models help respond to logistical issues and reduce delivery truck miles on the road advancing key sustainability goals.
		- enable clear real time communication with suppliers, retailers, and other network partners on global supply chains.


#### Data professionals profiles.
##### Data scientists and data analysts attributes
What they do
	- work directly with data
	- gather, clean, analyze, and share insights with stakeholders
	- uncover trends, patterns, and insights from data
How they do it
	- apply advanced modelling and statistical analytics techniques
Sample job titles
	- DS, Marketing analyst, DA, Business analyst.

##### Data management and infrastructure
Data professionals in these roles are primarily responsible for the systems that distribute data and maintain its integrity. They work with other data pros that help support their work.

Main responsibilities: 
	- Ensure the functionality of data systems and the compliance with local, state, and federal regulations involving data security and ethics.
Key attributes:
what they do: 
	- Manage data sources and the overall data infrastructure.
How they do it:
	- work with tools and dBs used to manage data within a business.
Sample job titles
	- data engineer, tech engineer, data manager, data steward, IT architect.

##### Business Intelligence
BI is more focused on creating processes and information channels that transform relevant data.
This means that they enable businesses to be operational. because businesses require data to operate.
Key attributes:
What they do: 
	- perform analysis that enable organizations to determine likely future trends.
How they do it:
	- create tables, reports, and dashboards that empower stakeholders, giving them access to the data they need to inform the entire business process on a continual basis.
Sample job titles:
	- BI architect, BI analyst, BI solution developer, BI software engineer, Data viz & BI analyst.




##### Product development teams
Professionals in these roles manage a portfolio of customer and stakeholder analytic projects and initiatives. They often manage the analytical strategy for the organization. Here, experience is most likely required, and responsibilities are larger and more global.
Key attributes:
What they do:
	- Manage analytical strategy within a project team.
How they do it:
	- Less hands on with data analysis, serving as the person a data analyst or scientist would report to.
Sample job titles:
	- PM, Product developer, Product Lead, Digital PM, Customer PM.
##### C-Suite
This classification of roles covers high-ranking execs within an organization. There's a trend for the c-suite to build a data-driven decision making into their processes. Pros in these roles are expected to be familiar with data and analytics.
Key attributes:
What they do:
	- Responsible for data & data pros across the entire organization.
How they do it:
	- they are decision makers found at the top and of a company's hierarchy.
Example job titles:
	- CMO, CDO, CAO, CIO, CDS

