You'll identify the skills data professionals use to analyze data. And how they collaborate with teammates.
### Trajectory of the field.
Trajectory of the data career field & Networking and building relationships.
The future of data careers:
	- AI & ML - fastest growth, significant advances.
	- AI - computer systems capable of doing tasks that require human intelligence.
	- Diverse teams of professionals from different backgrounds and experiences to counter human bias.
Incorporating a wide range of perspectives and worldviews promotes wider representation and yields more accurate results. Data professionals have yet to realize the full potential of AI. Growth in this field is in specialization.
### Current and future tools.
Learn how to apply your knowledge of one tool to another tool. 
- Today's tools:
	- Spreadsheets, DBs, Programming languages, Data viz, Dashboards.
- In the near future:
	- Numpy, Pandas, Statsmodels, Scikitlearn
- Tools for tomorrow and beyond:
	-  AI, ML - these tools can be used together to automate tasks and provide insights faster than ever.
### The places you'll go.
Creating engaging presentations of your work is important as having technical capabilities. How? Through Tableau Dashboards, Notebooks on Kaggle, GitHub repos, Blogs on Medium, Toward Data Science, Jupyter NBs, podcasts, blogs, YouTube videos etc.
This is intended to give you an idea of the possibilities for presenting your work and becoming an active participant in the field. Find what excites you, follow your imagination and motivation to contribute to the existing world of data.
Sharing your work.
It gives you a public-facing profile that employers can review. It also forces you to clearly explain your methodologies, making you a stronger data practitioner. Be creative, have fun and don't be afraid to put yourself out there.
### Showcase your skills: How to prepare for an interview.
- Build a professional online presence.
- Develop your portfolio to showcase your skills to potential employers.
- Connect with mentors who can help you prepare for the process.
- Prepare for the interview. It helps you build confidence.
### 4 different interview types and interview questions.
Establishing your professional narrative.
	It helps you build connections between your daily work and the positive influence it has on something bigger. It could be an existing project you helped finish or positive change in your organization or community. This applies to work done previously and the work you hope to do in the roles you apply for. 
	Framing your experience and goals around your brand allows you to develop a stronger sense of the value you bring to an organization and your own career goals.
	Your personal brand is the value you offer to potential employers. It can often provide answers to interview questions.
##### Interview question types.
They are of different types, and each organization has its own priorities. They belong to one of the four categories. 
Behavioral questions.
	These questions identifies your personal characteristics, your ability to handle a situation, assess your skills, experience, problem-solving abilities and cultural fit
Technical skills.
	Demonstrate the following:
		knowledge and skills presented in your resume or portfolio.
		Specific tasks, prior projects, take-home assessment.
	Outside of the interview: Assess your technical skills and experience.
Situational questions.
	How you would handle hypothetical situations. These questions seek to gain an understanding(preliminary) of how your skills fit the role.
	Assess your judgement, critical thinking skills, and ability to apply knowledge in new situations.
Subjective questions.
	These questions test your knowledge of a specific subject or area, usually pertaining to the field or industry that you are applying for. They test the relationship between the role you are applying for and the broader context of the company. They also assess your understanding of how the company works in contrast to direct competitors in the marketplace.
How do you apply the course skills.
	You may answer a list of questions that you might be asked in an interview for a data professional.
	Begin with the end in mind. Its taking the next step in your/my data analytics career.
	Attend interviews, use learning tools.
	Keep questions in mind and they will help you frame your focus in each course.
	Starting now, you can keep your final goals in mind and continue to build them into your final narrative.
	Have a strong framework for communicating with employers.
#### Data professional career resources.
#### Advice for job seekers
Enhance your online presence.
	Strengthen your professional relationships. This helps you increase your visibility to access more opportunities through building valuable relationships. How do you do this? By following businesses or organizations on social media platforms, joining data field webinars, blogging and following bloggers in your field and online communities, do in-person networking opportunities, and have mentors.
	Be fair and inclusive.
	Make data driven decisions.
	Have transferrable skills.
	Have the ability to frame a problem and solution.
	Be bold on the platforms.
#### Make the most out of mentorships.
Considering mentorship.
Mentors help you share knowledge, skills, and experience to help you grow and develop. They offer guidance at different points in your career. Here are things to consider:
	Decide what you are searching for in a mentor.
	Consider common interests.
	Respect their time.
	Build the relationship. Ask formally if natural connection does not happen, check in with yourself, thank them, establish equal relationship, and demand honesty.
	Consider resources. Meetups, Platforms, webinars, conferences, associations and societies, user communities and summits, non-profit organizations.