### Introduction.
Here, we learn about PACE (Plan, Analyze, Construct, Execute) project workflow and how to organize a data project. We'll also learn how to communicate effectively with teammates and stakeholders. 
A breakdown of what to learn:
- Workflow within data-driven careers.
- The PACE model.
- Effective communication best practices.
### Introduction to PACE.
The most important part of any project is preparation. Preparation is thinking through all the necessary steps and anticipating tasks. Its the most important part of any project. As a data professional, being able to visualize data, predict outcomes and quickly pivot away from obstacles makes you a problem-solver and a great asset to any organization. 
Benjamin Franklin once said that by failing to prepare, you are preparing to fail. After almost  three centuries, it still applies. 
Regardless of the project, having a structural framework in place for how to get that work done can be immensely beneficial. Many data science teams focus their time on what tool or equation to use to solve a problem and later realize that they were solving entirely the wrong problem. All the math in the universe won't help you if you don't point it in the right direction. 
But its easy to get excited about those nitty gritty details and rush headlong into a waste of time. The best teams have adopted a framework to help them focus on the most impactful actions in the most efficient order, and they have the discipline to use it to stay on track instead of running off into the weeds.
For the data workflow structure of the Google Data Analytics course, there were 6 phases namely; Ask, Prepare, Process, Analyze, Share, and Act. This framework is quite useful for a multitude of projects but often with bigger datasets you need more freedom and flexibility. 
The PACE framework designed for this program offers same workflow and structure but in a simpler way. PACE is a framework developed with input and feedback from Google's teams of data professionals. Its intent is to provide an initial structure that will help guide you through projects. The goal is to lay a foundation upon which you will develop your own workflow practices. The PACE framework helps you solve problems and make judgements quickly and efficiently. PACE is an acronym and each one of the letters represents actionable stage on a project. Plan, Analyze, Construct, and Execute.
1. Plan stage:
Here, you'll define the scope of the project.
You'll begin by identifying the information needs of your organization.
Questions asked at this stage:
	what are the goals of the project?
	what strategies will be needed?
	what will be the business or operational impacts of this plan?
Taking inventory of the project and tasks required will help you get a better understanding of the context of your work and prepare for success.
2. Analyze stage:
You'll engage with the data.
You'll start by preparing it for your project.
Steps involved:
	Acquire data from primary and secondary sources.
	Clean, reorganize, and transform data for analysis.
You'll conduct a methodological examination of the data.
	Engage in EDA - Exploratory Data Analysis.
This will involve converting the data into useful format, assessing the quality of the data, and then diving into the data to find as many as potentially useful insights and directions as possible. 
	Work with stakeholders.
This is to see which of these directions/areas are worth pursuing in more detail. 
3. Construct stage:
You're going to pursue a limited subset of all those potential insights that looked interesting to you in your EDA.
Here is where you'll work with other data professionals potentially statisticians and machine learning engineers, to do things like:
	Build and revise machine learning models.
	Uncover relationships in the data.
	Apply statistical inferences about data relationships.
4. Execute stage:
You'll share the results of your analysis and your collaboration with your stakeholders as well as the value you've unlocked from your data. 
Here you'll also:
	Present findings to internal and external stakeholders.
	Answer questions.
	Consider differing viewpoints.
	Present recommendations based on what you found on the data.
You may discover that you will revisit the planning and analysis stages as you refine models and incorporate feedback. A good way to visualize the PACE framework is as a completed circuit. Each of the four stages must be engaged for it to function correctly. The flow of energy in the PACE circuit is the communication between you, your team and all the other stakeholders and collaborators involved. When you look at the stages in this manner, you might think that communication flows one way. Well, you always start with planning, but don't be afraid to go back and iterate. With PACE, new information and feedback can be incorporated in any part of the process. You might need to return to Analyze to clarify some aspects of the data and then jump back to Execute to present this aspect to your stakeholders without the need to construct new models or dashboards.
Along the way, you'll see how the model can be scaled to fit within the scope of any project. The model's adaptability will prepare you for a dynamic profession that requires a high degree of professional flexibility and communication. Regardless of where your career takes you, the PACE framework is a tool that provides a clear foundation and structure. 
Through the continued application of the PACE framework, you'll prepare for each courses portfolio project. Then you'll have the opportunity to practice your evolving skills. Each portfolio project will introduce opportunities to develop and strengthen your organizational methods. As you develop your own intuitive workflow, the PACE framework can be a great organizational tool. 
### The PACE stages.
It provides a clear foundation and structure for data analysis projects. Why do we use a workflow structure?
- To be guided through the duration of data projects.
Within a large-scale project, there can be a certain number of tasks that require a certain order of operations. Identifying complexities and finding consistent ways to work together can make projects more efficient and enable more productive communication. 
- It helps in early identification of potential blockers, planning and preparation.
More about in PACE stages:
	They ensure communication flows between each stage.
	Its design promotes flexibility, allowing for free movement between stages as needed.
	Each stage is not mutually exclusive.
Plan stage:
	This is where you conceptualize the scope of the project and develop the steps that will guide you through the process of completing a project.
Analyze stage:
	This is where you will collect, prepare, and analyze all of the data for your project.
Construct stage:
	You will build models that will allow you access to hidden relationships locked within data.
Execute stage:
	You will present the findings of your analysis, receive feedback, and make revision as necessary.
### Key elements of communication.
In your role as a data professional, you are the direct connection between the information inside the data and other project stakeholders. Some key considerations when crafting a message. All communication exchanges have 3 key elements that we keep in mind.
	Purpose, Receiver, and Sender.
Purpose - The reason why the communication is taking place. The context matters.
Receiver - Your audience. Who you are talking to. Questions to ask are:
	What does my audience already know?
	What do they need to know?
	Its also important to know that every exchange can cause a rippled chain of events. As a data professional, you're often working as part of a distributed team across an organization and that's why a message shared with one receiver may be used for reporting with/to others.
Sender - The person responsible for crafting the message or communication. You are the sender. You are a crucial part of any communicative exchange. Questions to keep in mind:
	What's you relationship to the receivers?
	What's your role in this exchange?
	Are you reporting insights? Are you pitching ideas? or Are you identifying potential data inputs?
	What personal biases might affect the message you are trying to share?
Key elements of communication:
	Data, Data Professional(You), and Project Stakeholders.
Decision making requires documentation. Document your thought process and responses.
The same message might be shared in dramatically different ways when the purposes and the receivers changes from scenario to scenario. Example, non-tech people focus on impact of the project. Technical audience requires detailed code and project logistics.
### Best communication practices for data professionals.
Effective communication drives PACE. At every point in a project's lifecycle, you will need to be able to share obstacles and results, and provide necessary information to guide decision-making. Strong communication and technical skills as a data professional are needed.
##### Tips for effective communication that you can apply throughout the stages of PACE.
Each interaction requires an individualized approach to ensure that your audience understands what you are trying to communicate.
- Speak the language of your audience.
Identify the objectives of the person you are communicating with. It allows you to gain insight and assess how technical the conversation should be.
- Invite questions and welcome feedback.
Another person's feedback offers you a great way to gather insights for your personal growth and professional excellence.
- Be the connection of the data.
Help other stakeholders understand the process and how it addresses their needs.
- Let the visualization help tell the story.
It helps bring to life the details inside your data. It can promote general understanding.
- Build positive professional relationships.
When you consider the responsibilities and objectives of others, your communication will reflect that consideration. This builds credibility and influence in the workplace to allow career growth.
- Identify assumptions about the data.
The backgrounds, experiences, beliefs, and worldviews of people can influence the information contained within data. In your role as a data professional, consider ways that these various factors introduce bias. Assumptions can have powerful effects on outcomes. Active listening and effectively asking questions can help reduce the impact of bias on assumptions.
- Identify limitations in the data.
Limitations that can impede your analysis need to be identified and addressed before you can proceed. This can be incomplete data, format of the datasets, sufficient samples, bias, Personally Identifiable Information (PII) in data.
These limitations if found should be communicated before analysis. Make the stakeholders aware and also in the results.
##### Share findings.
Presentation means translating the results, concepts, and terms of your analysis for wider audiences. Best practices for sharing the results are:
- Craft the results to the needs of your stakeholders. Communicate why this data will help them achieve their goals.
- Determine the visualization and/or dashboard that are most effective. What data will you need and how do you want stakeholders to interact with it?
- Think about the design carefully. A simple yet visually appealing approach to visualization is always the best.
- Use a hierarchy of data in your visualization/dashboards. Information that is most important should be easily accessible, but you should provide a path to more details.
What to keep in mind when sharing results.
	The most important information for the audience.
	Most efficient way to share with the tools available and time allotted.
	What can I do to make the key points effectively?
Presentations.
	Communicate clearly and effectively.
Communication skills that pertain presentations include:
	the structure of your presentation - beginning, middle, and end.
	slide design.
	body language.
	tone of voice.
	accessibility as you are creating the assets.
Your role is to connect the data, technology, and the stakeholders. Share insights in a simple way that promotes general understanding.
### Communication drives PACE.
###### How the PACE framework and communication can be integrated together within data projects.
At first glance, The PACE workflow easily enables a wide view of an entire project's workload. That is, each stage from planning to executing is logically sequenced from the beginning, middle, to the end of a data project. PACE is incredibly flexible and it doesn't have to employ linear progression. Often, iteration makes sense in projects.
In practice, the PACE workflow is meant to serve as a navigational tool. Communication is what drives the framework to the realization of the project. Request from other stakeholders can come in at any time. Regardless of the timing of an additional request or task, data professionals need to be available and accessible throughout the entire project cycle. Through meetings, progress update, tracking system, and chat/email.
A good data professional is a proactive communicator who responds to communication in a timely fashion. Keeping your stakeholders up to date with clear explanations can make you the most effective data professional that you can be.
### Elements of successful communication(workplace).
What makes communication successful? Communication is one of the most essential components in the exchange of ideas and concepts. Its a large part of everyday life and the foundation of all human interaction. Its also an important element of analytically focused work that isn't discussed  as often as technical skills.
###### Tips for successful communication:
Having a clear vision of why you are communicating is the first thing you need to consider. Your 'why' depends on context set by the business or organization you work for. Your 'why' is also set by the project's mission statement. That is, the goals orienting the project. And when crafting any form of communication, use your why to guide your main ideas so that your audience can identify how to act or respond with purpose. This will help you organize your thoughts and develop clearer, more direct communication. 
###### Tips for efficient communication:
Use direct language.
Minimize wordiness.
Avoid unnecessary details.
###### Tips for clear communication.
- Use proper grammar and punctuation.
- Choose specific terms.
- Avoid technical language, jargon and buzzwords.
- Break complex ideas into shorter sentences especially when addressing a diverse audience of professionals from outside data analytics.
Practice this in all forms of communication. Email, text, virtual, online and offline platforms. Consider ways that you would communicate with technical concepts you are acquiring to different audiences. Also remain focused on the purpose and setting of your communication. All these factors add up and make a big difference to how effectively you communicate as a data professional.
###### Set the stage.
Think also about where the communication is taking place. The setting will have a direct input on how your message is delivered and how you shape it. Prepare for the most appropriate way to communicate in the setting you plan to be in. The context of your communication affects what to share, how it is shared and also how you follow up. The setting can be just as important as the actual communication.
- How to work one-on-one and in small groups.
	consider time, active listening, ask questions for alignment.
- Its all about time. Time is a currency in the productive world. Make sure:
	 you are efficient,
	 you are understandable in communication to audience and stakeholders,
	 you are clear and concise.
###### Active listening.
Information shared is valuable. Its shared in meetings, department, and in conversation. It helps you understand what other people are trying to communicate and sets you up to ask better, more insightful questions . What to do when active listening is:
	understand others,
	connect with them,
	show empathy,
	promote trust.
###### Asking Questions.
The right questions can lead to institutional learning and a fruitful exchange of ideas. It builds rapport and trust. It mitigates business risk by uncovering unforeseen pitfalls and hazards.

### Connect PACE with upcoming course themes.
Earlier courses of this program will use Planning & Analysis phases of PACE while Later courses will utilize Construction & Execution phases. On closer look, each course is operating within its own PACE framework. This is also applicable in the job market too.
### The value of the PACE strategy document.
This is a resource designed to assist you in this program and as a data analytics professional. Why do you need this document?:
	You require more than analytical skills to work as a data professional.
	Provides evidence of your expanded knowledge and can serve as a motivator when acquiring new skills.
	It functions as a record of your progress while developing new data analytical skills.
	It helps you improve communication skills.
The benefits of the PACE strategy document.
	Preserving detailed records of your decision making is important. The more you consider the questions at each stage of a project and preserve thoughtful responses, the more valuable these PACE strategy documents can be for your future. 
	It helps you build a cohesive and branded portfolio.
### Communicate objectives with a project proposal.
Effective communication and collaboration among all team members and stakeholders is key to the success of any data project. A project proposal can provide the structure and communication needed for tracking tasks. Its beneficial for teams facing high degree of flexibility.
###### Project Proposals.
Defines purpose, scope, key milestones, deliverables, timelines, and schedules. It outlines objectives and requirements and how to achieve your intended goals. Presents ideas in more details and milestones (actionable segments). Its created from inputs from stakeholders and team members. It can also be shared with executives, and clients to inform progress update, approval designs and layout.
###### Common elements of a project proposal.
Things to consider before the work begins.
- Project title - Prominent, brief, and purposeful. It can change over time due to the context and circumstances surrounding a project.
- Project objective - 1-3 sentences explaining what the project is trying to achieve.
- Milestones - grouping of tasks broken down from the work. Manageable tasks assist in the delegation and scheduling of work that needs to be completed within projects.
- Tasks - work that needs to be completed within a milestone.
- Outcomes - completed actions or results that allow a project to continue.
- Deliverables - end products of work undertaken for a project.
- Stakeholders - vested interest groups involved in the success of a project. Input from them can serve as a basis for making decisions throughout a project.
- Estimated time - set at the beginning of a project. Updated as the project moves along.
Its important to update proposals throughout the course of a project, as the project's scope, objectives, and stakeholders may change over time.
###### PACE and project proposals.
PACE workflow can be used at the very high-level stage of planning a project, and can also be used at each individual task within a project.
Through PACE, projects can be organized globally by outlining their main tasks and deliverables. At the same time, each individual task within a project can be broken down into smaller actions.
### Connect PACE with executive summaries.
###### Executive summary.
A document that is used to update decision makers (clients or executives), who may not be directly involved in the tasks of a project. It summarizes the most important points of a project, giving decision makers a brief overview of the most relevant information. It helps new team members to quickly catch up. It can have many formats but its a 1 page document. 
###### Key elements of an executive summary.
- Project title - theme of a project.
- The problem - the need, concern being targeted or addressed by the project. Its a hypothesis that you are trying to prove through data analysis.
- The solution - a summary of the project's main goal. These are the actions described that address the concerns outlined in the problem statement.
- Details / Key insights - It depends on the intended audience. Any additional background information that may assist the target audience in understanding the project's objectives.
- Next steps / recommendations - Based on the insight gained over the course of the project. Its for decision makers.
###### PACE and executive summaries.
Through PACE workflow, the tasks and deliverables of a project are clearly identified and recorded in a PACE strategy document. Great reference when working with executive summaries. Typically, an executive summary reports on an identified problem and outlines the solutions used to address the problem.